
Chapter 1

Marseilles -- The Arrival

On the 24th of February, 1810, the look-out at composed the crew, sprang to their respective stations at the
Notre-Dame de la Garde signalled the three-master, the spanker brails and outhaul, topsail sheets and halyards, the
Pharaon from Smyrna, Trieste, and Naples.
jib downhaul, and the topsail clewlines and buntlines. The
young sailor gave a look to see that his orders were
As usual, a pilot put off immediately, and rounding the
promptly and accurately obeyed, and then turned again to
Chateau d'If, got on board the vessel between Cape Morgion
the owner.
and Rion island.
"And how did this misfortune occur?" inquired the latter,
Immediately, and according to custom, the ramparts of Fort
resuming the interrupted conversation.
Saint-Jean were covered with spectators; it is always an
event at Marseilles for a ship to come into port, especially "Alas, sir, in the most unexpected manner. After a long talk
when this ship, like the Pharaon, has been built, rigged, and with the harbor-master, Captain Leclere left Naples greatly
laden at the old Phocee docks, and belongs to an owner of disturbed in mind. In twenty-four hours he was attacked by
the city.
a fever, and died three days afterwards. We performed the
usual burial service, and he is at his rest, sewn up in his
The ship drew on and had safely passed the strait, which
hammock with a thirty-six pound shot at his head and his
some volcanic shock has made between the Calasareigne and
heels, off El Giglio island. We bring to his widow his sword
Jaros islands; had doubled Pomegue, and approached the
and cross of honor. It was worth while, truly," added the
harbor under topsails, jib, and spanker, but so slowly and
young man with a melancholy smile, "to make war against
sedately that the idlers, with that instinct which is the
the English for ten years, and to die in his bed at last, like
forerunner of evil, asked one another what misfortune could
everybody else."
have happened on board. However, those experienced in
navigation saw plainly that if any accident had occurred, it "Why, you see, Edmond," replied the owner, who appeared
was not to the vessel herself, for she bore down with all the more comforted at every moment, "we are all mortal, and the
evidence of being skilfully handled, the anchor a-cockbill, old must make way for the young. If not, why, there would
the jib-boom guys already eased off, and standing by the be no promotion; and since you assure me that the cargo -- "
side of the pilot, who was steering the Pharaon towards the
"Is all safe and sound, M. Morrel, take my word for it; and I
narrow entrance of the inner port, was a young man, who,
advise you not to take 25,000 francs for the profits of the
with activity and vigilant eye, watched every motion of the
voyage."
ship, and repeated each direction of the pilot.
Then, as they were just passing the Round Tower, the young
The vague disquietude which prevailed among the
man shouted: "Stand by there to lower the topsails and jib;
spectators had so much affected one of the crowd that he did
brail up the spanker!"
not await the arrival of the vessel in harbor, but jumping into
a small skiff, desired to be pulled alongside the Pharaon, The order was executed as promptly as it would have been
on board a man-of-war.
which he reached as she rounded into La Reserve basin.
When the young man on board saw this person approach, he
left his station by the pilot, and, hat in hand, leaned over the
ship's bulwarks.

"Let go -- and clue up!" At this last command all the sails
were lowered, and the vessel moved almost imperceptibly
onwards.

He was a fine, tall, slim young fellow of eighteen or twenty,
with black eyes, and hair as dark as a raven's wing; and his
whole appearance bespoke that calmness and resolution
peculiar to men accustomed from their cradle to contend
with danger.

"Now, if you will come on board, M. Morrel," said Dantes,
observing the owner's impatience, "here is your supercargo,
M. Danglars, coming out of his cabin, who will furnish you
with every particular. As for me, I must look after the
anchoring, and dress the ship in mourning."

"Ah, is it you, Dantes?" cried the man in the skiff. "What's the The owner did not wait for a second invitation. He seized a
rope which Dantes flung to him, and with an activity that
matter? and why have you such an air of sadness aboard?"
would have done credit to a sailor, climbed up the side of
"A great misfortune, M. Morrel," replied the young man, -- "a
the ship, while the young man, going to his task, left the
great misfortune, for me especially! Off Civita Vecchia we
conversation to Danglars, who now came towards the owner.
lost our brave Captain Leclere."
He was a man of twenty-five or twenty-six years of age, of
"And the cargo?" inquired the owner, eagerly.
unprepossessing countenance, obsequious to his superiors,
insolent to his subordinates; and this, in addition to his
"Is all safe, M. Morrel; and I think you will be satisfied on
position as responsible agent on board, which is always
that head. But poor Captain Leclere -- "
obnoxious to the sailors, made him as much disliked by the
"What happened to him?" asked the owner, with an air of crew as Edmond Dantes was beloved by them.
considerable resignation. "What happened to the worthy
"Well, M. Morrel," said Danglars, "you have heard of the
captain?"
misfortune that has befallen us?"
"He died."
"Yes -- yes: poor Captain Leclere! He was a brave and an
"Fell into the sea?"
honest man."
"No, sir, he died of brain-fever in dreadful agony." Then
turning to the crew, he said, "Bear a hand there, to take in
sail!"

"And a first-rate seaman, one who had seen long and
honorable service, as became a man charged with the
interests of a house so important as that of Morrel & Son,"

All hands obeyed, and at once the eight or ten seamen who
1


CHAPTER 1


MARSEILLES -- THE ARRIVAL

replied Danglars.

Marseilles, the course she had taken, and what was her cargo.
I believe, if she had not been laden, and I had been her
"But," replied the owner, glancing after Dantes, who was
master, he would have bought her. But I told him I was only
watching the anchoring of his vessel, "it seems to me that a
mate, and that she belonged to the firm of Morrel & Son. `Ah,
sailor needs not be so old as you say, Danglars, to
yes,' he said, `I know them. The Morrels have been
understand his business, for our friend Edmond seems to
shipowners from father to son; and there was a Morrel who
understand it thoroughly, and not to require instruction
served in the same regiment with me when I was in garrison
from any one."
at Valence.'"
"Yes," said Danglars, darting at Edmond a look gleaming
"Pardieu, and that is true!" cried the owner, greatly delighted.
with hate. "Yes, he is young, and youth is invariably
"And that was Policar Morrel, my uncle, who was
self-confident. Scarcely was the captain's breath out of his
afterwards a captain. Dantes, you must tell my uncle that the
body when he assumed the command without consulting
emperor remembered him, and you will see it will bring
any one, and he caused us to lose a day and a half at the
tears into the old soldier's eyes. Come, come," continued he,
Island of Elba, instead of making for Marseilles direct."
patting Edmond's shoulder kindly, "you did very right,
"As to taking command of the vessel," replied Morrel, "that Dantes, to follow Captain Leclere's instructions, and touch at
was his duty as captain's mate; as to losing a day and a half Elba, although if it were known that you had conveyed a
off the Island of Elba, he was wrong, unless the vessel packet to the marshal, and had conversed with the emperor,
needed repairs."
it might bring you into trouble."
"The vessel was in as good condition as I am, and as, I hope
you are, M. Morrel, and this day and a half was lost from
pure whim, for the pleasure of going ashore, and nothing
else."

"How could that bring me into trouble, sir?" asked Dantes;
"for I did not even know of what I was the bearer; and the
emperor merely made such inquiries as he would of the first
comer. But, pardon me, here are the health officers and the
"Dantes," said the shipowner, turning towards the young customs inspectors coming alongside." And the young man
went to the gangway. As he departed, Danglars approached,
man, "come this way!"
and said, -"In a moment, sir," answered Dantes, "and I'm with you."
"Well, it appears that he has given you satisfactory reasons
Then calling to the crew, he said -- "Let go!"
for his landing at Porto-Ferrajo?"
The anchor was instantly dropped, and the chain ran rattling
through the port-hole. Dantes continued at his post in spite "Yes, most satisfactory, my dear Danglars."
of the presence of the pilot, until this manoeuvre was "Well, so much the better," said the supercargo; "for it is not
completed, and then he added, "Half-mast the colors, and pleasant to think that a comrade has not done his duty."
square the yards!"
"Dantes has done his," replied the owner, "and that is not
"You see," said Danglars, "he fancies himself captain already, saying much. It was Captain Leclere who gave orders for
upon my word."
this delay."
"And so, in fact, he is," said the owner.
"Except your signature and your partner's, M. Morrel."

"Talking of Captain Leclere, has not Dantes given you a
letter from him?"

"And why should he not have this?" asked the owner; "he is "To me? -- no -- was there one?"
young, it is true, but he seems to me a thorough seaman, and "I believe that, besides the packet, Captain Leclere confided a
of full experience."
letter to his care."
A cloud passed over Danglars' brow. "Your pardon, M. "Of what packet are you speaking, Danglars?"
Morrel," said Dantes, approaching, "the vessel now rides at
"Why, that which Dantes left at Porto-Ferrajo."
anchor, and I am at your service. You hailed me, I think?"
"How do you know he had a packet to leave at
Danglars retreated a step or two. "I wished to inquire why
Porto-Ferrajo?"
you stopped at the Island of Elba?"
Danglars turned very red.
"I do not know, sir; it was to fulfil the last instructions of
Captain Leclere, who, when dying, gave me a packet for "I was passing close to the door of the captain's cabin, which
Marshal Bertrand."
was half open, and I saw him give the packet and letter to
Dantes."
"Then did you see him, Edmond?"
"He did not speak to me of it," replied the shipowner; "but if
"Who?"
there be any letter he will give it to me."
"The marshal."
Danglars reflected for a moment. "Then, M. Morrel, I beg of
"Yes."
you," said he, "not to say a word to Dantes on the subject. I
Morrel looked around him, and then, drawing Dantes on may have been mistaken."
one side, he said suddenly -- "And how is the emperor?"
"Very well, as far as I could judge from the sight of him."
"You saw the emperor, then?"
"He entered the marshal's apartment while I was there."
"And you spoke to him?"

At this moment the young man returned; Danglars
withdrew.
"Well, my dear Dantes, are you now free?" inquired the
owner.
"Yes, sir."

"You have not been long detained."
"Why, it was he who spoke to me, sir," said Dantes, with a
"No. I gave the custom-house officers a copy of our bill of
smile.
lading; and as to the other papers, they sent a man off with
"And what did he say to you?"
the pilot, to whom I gave them."
"Asked me questions about the vessel, the time she left

"Then you have nothing more to do here?"
"No -- everything is all right now."
"Then you can come and dine with me?"
"I really must ask you to excuse me, M. Morrel. My first visit
is due to my father, though I am not the less grateful for the
honor you have done me."
"Right, Dantes, quite right. I always knew you were a good
son."

"Very good; have what time you require, Dantes. It will take
quite six weeks to unload the cargo, and we cannot get you
ready for sea until three months after that; only be back
again in three months, for the Pharaon," added the owner,
patting the young sailor on the back, "cannot sail without her
captain."
"Without her captain!" cried Dantes, his eyes sparkling with
animation; "pray mind what you say, for you are touching
on the most secret wishes of my heart. Is it really your
intention to make me captain of the Pharaon?"

"And," inquired Dantes, with some hesitation, "do you know
"If I were sole owner we'd shake hands on it now, my dear
how my father is?"
Dantes, and call it settled; but I have a partner, and you
"Well, I believe, my dear Edmond, though I have not seen know the Italian proverb -- Chi ha compagno ha padrone -him lately."
`He who has a partner has a master.' But the thing is at least
half done, as you have one out of two votes. Rely on me to
"Yes, he likes to keep himself shut up in his little room."
procure you the other; I will do my best."
"That proves, at least, that he has wanted for nothing during
"Ah, M. Morrel," exclaimed the young seaman, with tears in
your absence."
his eyes, and grasping the owner's hand, "M. Morrel, I thank
Dantes smiled. "My father is proud, sir, and if he had not a
you in the name of my father and of Mercedes."
meal left, I doubt if he would have asked anything from
"That's all right, Edmond. There's a providence that watches
anyone, except from Heaven."
over the deserving. Go to your father: go and see Mercedes,
"Well, then, after this first visit has been made we shall count
and afterwards come to me."
on you."
"Shall I row you ashore?"
"I must again excuse myself, M. Morrel, for after this first
visit has been paid I have another which I am most anxious "No, thank you; I shall remain and look over the accounts
with Danglars. Have you been satisfied with him this
to pay."
voyage?"
"True, Dantes, I forgot that there was at the Catalans some
one who expects you no less impatiently than your father -- "That is according to the sense you attach to the question, sir.
Do you mean is he a good comrade? No, for I think he never
the lovely Mercedes."
liked me since the day when I was silly enough, after a little
Dantes blushed.
quarrel we had, to propose to him to stop for ten minutes at
"Ah, ha," said the shipowner, "I am not in the least surprised, the island of Monte Cristo to settle the dispute -- a
for she has been to me three times, inquiring if there were proposition which I was wrong to suggest, and he quite right
any news of the Pharaon. Peste, Edmond, you have a very to refuse. If you mean as responsible agent when you ask me
handsome mistress!"
the question, I believe there is nothing to say against him,
"She is not my mistress," replied the young sailor, gravely; and that you will be content with the way in which he has
performed his duty."
"she is my betrothed."
"Sometimes one and the same thing," said Morrel, with a "But tell me, Dantes, if you had command of the Pharaon
should you be glad to see Danglars remain?"
smile.
"Captain or mate, M. Morrel, I shall always have the greatest
"Not with us, sir," replied Dantes.
respect for those who possess the owners' confidence."
"Well, well, my dear Edmond," continued the owner, "don't
let me detain you. You have managed my affairs so well that "That's right, that's right, Dantes! I see you are a thoroughly
I ought to allow you all the time you require for your own. good fellow, and will detain you no longer. Go, for I see how
impatient you are."
Do you want any money?"
"No, sir; I have all my pay to take -- nearly three months' "Then I have leave?"
wages."

"Go, I tell you."

"You are a careful fellow, Edmond."

"May I have the use of your skiff?"

"Say I have a poor father, sir."

"Certainly."

"Yes, yes, I know how good a son you are, so now hasten "Then, for the present, M. Morrel, farewell, and a thousand
away to see your father. I have a son too, and I should be thanks!"
very wroth with those who detained him from me after a
"I hope soon to see you again, my dear Edmond. Good luck
three months' voyage."
to you."
"Then I have your leave, sir?"
The young sailor jumped into the skiff, and sat down in the
"Yes, if you have nothing more to say to me."
stern sheets, with the order that he be put ashore at La
Canebiere. The two oarsmen bent to their work, and the little
"Nothing."
boat glided away as rapidly as possible in the midst of the
"Captain Leclere did not, before he died, give you a letter for thousand vessels which choke up the narrow way which
me?"
leads between the two rows of ships from the mouth of the
"He was unable to write, sir. But that reminds me that I must harbor to the Quai d'Orleans.
ask your leave of absence for some days."
The shipowner, smiling, followed him with his eyes until he
"To get married?"
"Yes, first, and then to go to Paris."

saw him spring out on the quay and disappear in the midst
of the throng, which from five o'clock in the morning until
nine o'clock at night, swarms in the famous street of La
3


CHAPTER 1


MARSEILLES -- THE ARRIVAL

Canebiere, -- a street of which the modern Phocaeans are so
proud that they say with all the gravity in the world, and
with that accent which gives so much character to what is
said, "If Paris had La Canebiere, Paris would be a second
Marseilles." On turning round the owner saw Danglars

4

behind him, apparently awaiting orders, but in reality also
watching the young sailor, -- but there was a great difference
in the expression of the two men who thus followed the
movements of Edmond Dantes.


Chapter 2

Father And Son

W

e will leave Danglars struggling with the demon of
hatred, and endeavoring to insinuate in the ear of the
shipowner some evil suspicions against his comrade, and
follow Dantes, who, after having traversed La Canebiere,
took the Rue de Noailles, and entering a small house, on the
left of the Allees de Meillan, rapidly ascended four flights of
a dark staircase, holding the baluster with one hand, while
with the other he repressed the beatings of his heart, and
paused before a half-open door, from which he could see the
whole of a small room.

"It is no use," said the old man, "there is no wine."

This room was occupied by Dantes' father. The news of the
arrival of the Pharaon had not yet reached the old man, who,
mounted on a chair, was amusing himself by training with
trembling hand the nasturtiums and sprays of clematis that
clambered over the trellis at his window. Suddenly, he felt
an arm thrown around his body, and a well-known voice
behind him exclaimed, "Father -- dear father!"

"Yes, yes, Edmond, that is true, but you forgot at that time a
little debt to our neighbor, Caderousse. He reminded me of it,
telling me if I did not pay for you, he would be paid by M.
Morrel; and so, you see, lest he might do you an injury" --

The old man uttered a cry, and turned round; then, seeing
his son, he fell into his arms, pale and trembling.

"But," cried Dantes, "it was a hundred and forty francs I
owed Caderousse."

"What ails you, my dearest father? Are you ill?" inquired the
young man, much alarmed.

"Yes," stammered the old man.

"No, no, my dear Edmond -- my boy -- my son! -- no; but I
did not expect you; and joy, the surprise of seeing you so
suddenly -- Ah, I feel as if I were going to die."
"Come, come, cheer up, my dear father! 'Tis I -- really I! They
say joy never hurts, and so I came to you without any
warning. Come now, do smile, instead of looking at me so
solemnly. Here I am back again, and we are going to be
happy."
"Yes, yes, my boy, so we will -- so we will," replied the old
man; "but how shall we be happy? Shall you never leave me
again? Come, tell me all the good fortune that has befallen
you."
"God forgive me," said the young man, "for rejoicing at
happiness derived from the misery of others, but, Heaven
knows, I did not seek this good fortune; it has happened,
and I really cannot pretend to lament it. The good Captain
Leclere is dead, father, and it is probable that, with the aid of
M. Morrel, I shall have his place. Do you understand, father?
Only imagine me a captain at twenty, with a hundred louis
pay, and a share in the profits! Is this not more than a poor
sailor like me could have hoped for?"
"Yes, my dear boy," replied the old man, "it is very
fortunate."

"What, no wine?" said Dantes, turning pale, and looking
alternately at the hollow cheeks of the old man and the
empty cupboards. "What, no wine? Have you wanted money,
father?"
"I want nothing now that I have you," said the old man.
"Yet," stammered Dantes, wiping the perspiration from his
brow, -- "yet I gave you two hundred francs when I left,
three months ago."

"Well?"
"Why, I paid him."

"And you paid him out of the two hundred francs I left
you?"
The old man nodded.
"So that you have lived for three months on sixty francs,"
muttered Edmond.
"You know how little I require," said the old man.
"Heaven pardon me," cried Edmond, falling on his knees
before his father.
"What are you doing?"
"You have wounded me to the heart."
"Never mind it, for I see you once more," said the old man;
"and now it's all over -- everything is all right again."
"Yes, here I am," said the young man, "with a promising
future and a little money. Here, father, here!" he said, "take
this -- take it, and send for something immediately." And he
emptied his pockets on the table, the contents consisting of a
dozen gold pieces, five or six five-franc pieces, and some
smaller coin. The countenance of old Dantes brightened.
"Whom does this belong to?" he inquired.
"To me, to you, to us! Take it; buy some provisions; be happy,
and to-morrow we shall have more."

"Gently, gently," said the old man, with a smile; "and by
"Well, then, with the first money I touch, I mean you to have
your leave I will use your purse moderately, for they would
a small house, with a garden in which to plant clematis,
say, if they saw me buy too many things at a time, that I had
nasturtiums, and honeysuckle. But what ails you, father? Are
been obliged to await your return, in order to be able to
you not well?"
purchase them."
"'Tis nothing, nothing; it will soon pass away" -- and as he
"Do as you please; but, first of all, pray have a servant, father.
said so the old man's strength failed him, and he fell
I will not have you left alone so long. I have some smuggled
backwards.
coffee and most capital tobacco, in a small chest in the hold,
"Come, come," said the young man, "a glass of wine, father, which you shall have to-morrow. But, hush, here comes
will revive you. Where do you keep your wine?"
somebody."
"No, no; thanks. You need not look for it; I do not want it,"
said the old man.

"'Tis Caderousse, who has heard of your arrival, and no
"Yes, yes, father, tell me where it is," and he opened two or doubt comes to congratulate you on your fortunate return."
three cupboards.
"Ah, lips that say one thing, while the heart thinks another,"
5


CHAPTER 2


FATHER AND SON

murmured Edmond. "But, never mind, he is a neighbor who
has done us a service on a time, so he's welcome."

replied the young man. "I was most anxious to see you."

"But it must have vexed M. Morrel, good, worthy man," said
As Edmond paused, the black and bearded head of Caderousse. "And when you are looking forward to be
Caderousse appeared at the door. He was a man of captain, it was wrong to annoy the owner."
twenty-five or six, and held a piece of cloth, which, being a
"But I explained to him the cause of my refusal," replied
tailor, he was about to make into a coat-lining.
Dantes, "and I hope he fully understood it."
"What, is it you, Edmond, back again?" said he, with a broad
"Yes, but to be captain one must do a little flattery to one's
Marseillaise accent, and a grin that displayed his ivory-white
patrons."
teeth.
"I hope to be captain without that," said Dantes.
"Yes, as you see, neighbor Caderousse; and ready to be
agreeable to you in any and every way," replied Dantes, but "So much the better -- so much the better! Nothing will give
greater pleasure to all your old friends; and I know one
ill-concealing his coldness under this cloak of civility.
down there behind the Saint Nicolas citadel who will not be
"Thanks -- thanks; but, fortunately, I do not want for
sorry to hear it."
anything; and it chances that at times there are others who
have need of me." Dantes made a gesture. "I do not allude to "Mercedes?" said the old man.
you, my boy. No! -- no! I lent you money, and you returned "Yes, my dear father, and with your permission, now I have
it; that's like good neighbors, and we are quits."
seen you, and know you are well and have all you require, I
"We are never quits with those who oblige us," was Dantes' will ask your consent to go and pay a visit to the Catalans."
reply; "for when we do not owe them money, we owe them "Go, my dear boy," said old Dantes: "and heaven bless you in
gratitude."
your wife, as it has blessed me in my son!"
"What's the use of mentioning that? What is done is done. "His wife!" said Caderousse; "why, how fast you go on,
Let us talk of your happy return, my boy. I had gone on the father Dantes; she is not his wife yet, as it seems to me."
quay to match a piece of mulberry cloth, when I met friend
"So, but according to all probability she soon will be," replied
Danglars. `You at Marseilles?' -- `Yes,' says he.
Edmond.
"`I thought you were at Smyrna.' -- `I was; but am now back
"Yes -- yes," said Caderousse; "but you were right to return
again.'
as soon as possible, my boy."
"`And where is the dear boy, our little Edmond?'
"And why?"
"`Why, with his father, no doubt,' replied Danglars. And so I
came," added Caderousse, "as fast as I could to have the "Because Mercedes is a very fine girl, and fine girls never
lack followers; she particularly has them by dozens."
pleasure of shaking hands with a friend."
"Worthy Caderousse!" said the old man, "he is so much
attached to us."

"Really?" answered Edmond, with a smile which had in it
traces of slight uneasiness.

"Yes, to be sure I am. I love and esteem you, because honest
folks are so rare. But it seems you have come back rich, my
boy," continued the tailor, looking askance at the handful of
gold and silver which Dantes had thrown on the table.

"Ah, yes," continued Caderousse, "and capital offers, too; but
you know, you will be captain, and who could refuse you
then?"

The young man remarked the greedy glance which shone in
the dark eyes of his neighbor. "Eh," he said, negligently. "this
money is not mine. I was expressing to my father my fears
that he had wanted many things in my absence, and to
convince me he emptied his purse on the table. Come,
father" added Dantes, "put this money back in your box -unless neighbor Caderousse wants anything, and in that case
it is at his service."
"No, my boy, no," said Caderousse. "I am not in any want,
thank God, my living is suited to my means. Keep your
money -- keep it, I say; -- one never has too much; -- but, at
the same time, my boy, I am as much obliged by your offer
as if I took advantage of it."
"It was offered with good will," said Dantes.
"No doubt, my boy; no doubt. Well, you stand well with M.
Morrel I hear, -- you insinuating dog, you!"
"M. Morrel has always been exceedingly kind to me," replied
Dantes.
"Then you were wrong to refuse to dine with him."
"What, did you refuse to dine with him?" said old Dantes;
"and did he invite you to dine?"

"Meaning to say," replied Dantes, with a smile which but
ill-concealed his trouble, "that if I were not a captain" -"Eh -- eh!" said Caderousse, shaking his head.
"Come, come," said the sailor, "I have a better opinion than
you of women in general, and of Mercedes in particular; and
I am certain that, captain or not, she will remain ever faithful
to me."
"So much the better -- so much the better," said Caderousse.
"When one is going to be married, there is nothing like
implicit confidence; but never mind that, my boy, -- go and
announce your arrival, and let her know all your hopes and
prospects."
"I will go directly," was Edmond's reply; and, embracing his
father, and nodding to Caderousse, he left the apartment.
Caderousse lingered for a moment, then taking leave of old
Dantes, he went downstairs to rejoin Danglars, who awaited
him at the corner of the Rue Senac.
"Well," said Danglars, "did you see him?"
"I have just left him," answered Caderousse.
"Did he allude to his hope of being captain?"
"He spoke of it as a thing already decided."

"Yes, my dear father," replied Edmond, smiling at his father's "Indeed!" said Danglars, "he is in too much hurry, it appears
to me."
astonishment at the excessive honor paid to his son.
"And why did you refuse, my son?" inquired the old man.

"Why, it seems M. Morrel has promised him the thing."

"That I might the sooner see you again, my dear father,"
6

"So that he is quite elated about it?"

"Why, yes, he is actually insolent over the matter -- has
already offered me his patronage, as if he were a grand
personage, and proffered me a loan of money, as though he
were a banker."

"I know nothing for certain; only I have seen things which
induce me to believe, as I told you, that the future captain
will find some annoyance in the vicinity of the Vieilles
Infirmeries."

"Which you refused?"

"What have you seen? -- come, tell me!"

"Most assuredly; although I might easily have accepted it, for
it was I who put into his hands the first silver he ever earned;
but now M. Dantes has no longer any occasion for assistance
-- he is about to become a captain."

"Well, every time I have seen Mercedes come into the city
she has been accompanied by a tall, strapping, black-eyed
Catalan, with a red complexion, brown skin, and fierce air,
whom she calls cousin."

"Pooh!" said Danglars, "he is not one yet."

"Really; and you think this cousin pays her attentions?"

"Ma foi, it will be as well if he is not," answered Caderousse;
"for if he should be, there will be really no speaking to him."

"I only suppose so. What else can a strapping chap of
twenty-one mean with a fine wench of seventeen?"

"If we choose," replied Danglars, "he will remain what he is;
and perhaps become even less than he is."

"And you say that Dantes has gone to the Catalans?"

"What do you mean?"
"Nothing -- I was speaking to myself. And is he still in love
with the Catalane?"

"He went before I came down."
"Let us go the same way; we will stop at La Reserve, and we
can drink a glass of La Malgue, whilst we wait for news."

"Come along," said Caderousse; "but you pay the score."
"Over head and ears; but, unless I am much mistaken, there
"Of course," replied Danglars; and going quickly to the
will be a storm in that quarter."
designated place, they called for a bottle of wine, and two
glasses.
"Explain yourself."
"Why should I?"
"It is more important than you think, perhaps. You do not
like Dantes?"
"I never like upstarts."

Pere Pamphile had seen Dantes pass not ten minutes before;
and assured that he was at the Catalans, they sat down
under the budding foliage of the planes and sycamores, in
the branches of which the birds were singing their welcome
to one of the first days of spring.

"Then tell me all you know about the Catalane."

7


CHAPTER 3


Chapter 3

B

eyond a bare, weather-worn wall, about a hundred
paces from the spot where the two friends sat looking
and listening as they drank their wine, was the village of the
Catalans. Long ago this mysterious colony quitted Spain,
and settled on the tongue of land on which it is to this day.
Whence it came no one knew, and it spoke an unknown
tongue. One of its chiefs, who understood Provencal, begged
the commune of Marseilles to give them this bare and barren
promontory, where, like the sailors of old, they had run their
boats ashore. The request was granted; and three months
afterwards, around the twelve or fifteen small vessels which
had brought these gypsies of the sea, a small village sprang
up. This village, constructed in a singular and picturesque
manner, half Moorish, half Spanish, still remains, and is
inhabited by descendants of the first comers, who speak the
language of their fathers. For three or four centuries they
have remained upon this small promontory, on which they
had settled like a flight of seabirds, without mixing with the
Marseillaise population, intermarrying, and preserving their
original customs and the costume of their mother-country as
they have preserved its language.
Our readers will follow us along the only street of this little
village, and enter with us one of the houses, which is
sunburned to the beautiful dead-leaf color peculiar to the
buildings of the country, and within coated with whitewash,
like a Spanish posada. A young and beautiful girl, with hair
as black as jet, her eyes as velvety as the gazelle's, was
leaning with her back against the wainscot, rubbing in her
slender delicately moulded fingers a bunch of heath
blossoms, the flowers of which she was picking off and
strewing on the floor; her arms, bare to the elbow, brown,
and modelled after those of the Arlesian Venus, moved with
a kind of restless impatience, and she tapped the earth with
her arched and supple foot, so as to display the pure and full
shape of her well-turned leg, in its red cotton, gray and blue
clocked, stocking. At three paces from her, seated in a chair
which he balanced on two legs, leaning his elbow on an old
worm-eaten table, was a tall young man of twenty, or
two-and-twenty, who was looking at her with an air in
which vexation and uneasiness were mingled. He
questioned her with his eyes, but the firm and steady gaze of
the young girl controlled his look.

THE CATALANS

The Catalans
Fernand?"
"Yes, that is very true, Mercedes," replied the young man,
"Yes, you have been cruelly frank with me; but do you forget
that it is among the Catalans a sacred law to intermarry?"
"You mistake, Fernand; it is not a law, but merely a custom,
and, I pray of you, do not cite this custom in your favor. You
are included in the conscription, Fernand, and are only at
liberty on sufferance, liable at any moment to be called upon
to take up arms. Once a soldier, what would you do with me,
a poor orphan, forlorn, without fortune, with nothing but a
half-ruined hut and a few ragged nets, the miserable
inheritance left by my father to my mother, and by my
mother to me? She has been dead a year, and you know,
Fernand, I have subsisted almost entirely on public charity.
Sometimes you pretend I am useful to you, and that is an
excuse to share with me the produce of your fishing, and I
accept it, Fernand, because you are the son of my father's
brother, because we were brought up together, and still
more because it would give you so much pain if I refuse. But
I feel very deeply that this fish which I go and sell, and with
the produce of which I buy the flax I spin, -- I feel very
keenly, Fernand, that this is charity."
"And if it were, Mercedes, poor and lone as you are, you suit
me as well as the daughter of the first shipowner or the
richest banker of Marseilles! What do such as we desire but a
good wife and careful housekeeper, and where can I look for
these better than in you?"
"Fernand," answered Mercedes, shaking her head, "a woman
becomes a bad manager, and who shall say she will remain
an honest woman, when she loves another man better than
her husband? Rest content with my friendship, for I say once
more that is all I can promise, and I will promise no more
than I can bestow."
"I understand," replied Fernand, "you can endure your own
wretchedness patiently, but you are afraid to share mine.
Well, Mercedes, beloved by you, I would tempt fortune; you
would bring me good luck, and I should become rich. I could
extend my occupation as a fisherman, might get a place as
clerk in a warehouse, and become in time a dealer myself."

"You could do no such thing, Fernand; you are a soldier, and
"You see, Mercedes," said the young man, "here is Easter if you remain at the Catalans it is because there is no war; so
come round again; tell me, is this the moment for a remain a fisherman, and contented with my friendship, as I
cannot give you more."
wedding?"
"I have answered you a hundred times, Fernand, and really
you must be very stupid to ask me again."
"Well, repeat it, -- repeat it, I beg of you, that I may at last
believe it! Tell me for the hundredth time that you refuse my
love, which had your mother's sanction. Make me
understand once for all that you are trifling with my
happiness, that my life or death are nothing to you. Ah, to
have dreamed for ten years of being your husband,
Mercedes, and to lose that hope, which was the only stay of
my existence!"
"At least it was not I who ever encouraged you in that hope,
Fernand," replied Mercedes; "you cannot reproach me with
the slightest coquetry. I have always said to you, `I love you
as a brother; but do not ask from me more than sisterly
affection, for my heart is another's.' Is not this true,
8

"Well, I will do better, Mercedes. I will be a sailor; instead of
the costume of our fathers, which you despise, I will wear a
varnished hat, a striped shirt, and a blue jacket, with an
anchor on the buttons. Would not that dress please you?"
"What do you mean?" asked Mercedes, with an angry glance,
-- "what do you mean? I do not understand you?"
"I mean, Mercedes, that you are thus harsh and cruel with
me, because you are expecting some one who is thus attired;
but perhaps he whom you await is inconstant, or if he is not,
the sea is so to him."
"Fernand," cried Mercedes, "I believed you were
good-hearted, and I was mistaken! Fernand, you are wicked
to call to your aid jealousy and the anger of God! Yes, I will
not deny it, I do await, and I do love him of whom you
speak; and, if he does not return, instead of accusing him of
the inconstancy which you insinuate, I will tell you that he

died loving me and me only." The young girl made a gesture
of rage. "I understand you, Fernand; you would be revenged
on him because I do not love you; you would cross your
Catalan knife with his dirk. What end would that answer?
To lose you my friendship if he were conquered, and see that
friendship changed into hate if you were victor. Believe me,
to seek a quarrel with a man is a bad method of pleasing the
woman who loves that man. No, Fernand, you will not thus
give way to evil thoughts. Unable to have me for your wife,
you will content yourself with having me for your friend and
sister; and besides," she added, her eyes troubled and
moistened with tears, "wait, wait, Fernand; you said just
now that the sea was treacherous, and he has been gone four
months, and during these four months there have been some
terrible storms."

trembling. Edmond then cast his eyes scrutinizingly at the
agitated and embarrassed Mercedes, and then again on the
gloomy and menacing Fernand. This look told him all, and
his anger waxed hot.
"I did not know, when I came with such haste to you, that I
was to meet an enemy here."
"An enemy!" cried Mercedes, with an angry look at her
cousin. "An enemy in my house, do you say, Edmond! If I
believed that, I would place my arm under yours and go
with you to Marseilles, leaving the house to return to it no
more."

Fernand's eye darted lightning. "And should any misfortune
occur to you, dear Edmond," she continued with the same
calmness which proved to Fernand that the young girl had
Fernand made no reply, nor did he attempt to check the tears read the very innermost depths of his sinister thought, "if
which flowed down the cheeks of Mercedes, although for misfortune should occur to you, I would ascend the highest
each of these tears he would have shed his heart's blood; but point of the Cape de Morgion and cast myself headlong from
these tears flowed for another. He arose, paced a while up it."
and down the hut, and then, suddenly stopping before Fernand became deadly pale. "But you are deceived,
Mercedes, with his eyes glowing and his hands clinched, -- Edmond," she continued. "You have no enemy here -- there
"Say, Mercedes," he said, "once for all, is this your final is no one but Fernand, my brother, who will grasp your
determination?"
hand as a devoted friend."
"I love Edmond Dantes," the young girl calmly replied, "and And at these words the young girl fixed her imperious look
none but Edmond shall ever be my husband."
on the Catalan, who, as if fascinated by it, came slowly
towards Edmond, and offered him his hand. His hatred, like
"And you will always love him?"
a powerless though furious wave, was broken against the
"As long as I live."
strong ascendancy which Mercedes exercised over him.
Fernand let fall his head like a defeated man, heaved a sigh Scarcely, however, had he touched Edmond's hand than he
that was like a groan, and then suddenly looking her full in felt he had done all he could do, and rushed hastily out of
the face, with clinched teeth and expanded nostrils, said, -- the house.
"But if he is dead" -"Oh," he exclaimed, running furiously and tearing his hair -"If he is dead, I shall die too."
"Oh, who will deliver me from this man? Wretched -wretched that I am!"
"If he has forgotten you" -"Hallo, Catalan! Hallo, Fernand! where are you running to?"
"Mercedes!" called a joyous voice from without, -exclaimed a voice.
"Mercedes!"
The young man stopped suddenly, looked around him, and
"Ah," exclaimed the young girl, blushing with delight, and
perceived Caderousse sitting at table with Danglars, under
fairly leaping in excess of love, "you see he has not forgotten
an arbor.
me, for here he is!" And rushing towards the door, she
opened it, saying, "Here, Edmond, here I am!"
"Well", said Caderousse, "why don't you come? Are you
really in such a hurry that you have no time to pass the time
Fernand, pale and trembling, drew back, like a traveller at
of day with your friends?"
the sight of a serpent, and fell into a chair beside him.
Edmond and Mercedes were clasped in each other's arms. "Particularly when they have still a full bottle before them,"
The burning Marseilles sun, which shot into the room added Danglars. Fernand looked at them both with a
through the open door, covered them with a flood of light. stupefied air, but did not say a word.
At first they saw nothing around them. Their intense
"He seems besotted," said Danglars, pushing Caderousse
happiness isolated them from all the rest of the world, and
with his knee. "Are we mistaken, and is Dantes triumphant
they only spoke in broken words, which are the tokens of a
in spite of all we have believed?"
joy so extreme that they seem rather the expression of
sorrow. Suddenly Edmond saw the gloomy, pale, and "Why, we must inquire into that," was Caderousse's reply;
threatening countenance of Fernand, as it was defined in the and turning towards the young man, said, "Well, Catalan,
shadow. By a movement for which he could scarcely account can't you make up your mind?"
to himself, the young Catalan placed his hand on the knife at Fernand wiped away the perspiration steaming from his
his belt.
brow, and slowly entered the arbor, whose shade seemed to
"Ah, your pardon," said Dantes, frowning in his turn; "I did
not perceive that there were three of us." Then, turning to
Mercedes, he inquired, "Who is this gentleman?"
"One who will be your best friend, Dantes, for he is my
friend, my cousin, my brother; it is Fernand -- the man
whom, after you, Edmond, I love the best in the world. Do
you not remember him?"

restore somewhat of calmness to his senses, and whose
coolness somewhat of refreshment to his exhausted body.
"Good-day," said he. "You called me, didn't you?" And he
fell, rather than sat down, on one of the seats which
surrounded the table.

"I called you because you were running like a madman, and
I was afraid you would throw yourself into the sea," said
"Yes!" said Dantes, and without relinquishing Mercedes Caderousse, laughing. "Why, when a man has friends, they
hand clasped in one of his own, he extended the other to the are not only to offer him a glass of wine, but, moreover, to
Catalan with a cordial air. But Fernand, instead of prevent his swallowing three or four pints of water
responding to this amiable gesture, remained mute and unnecessarily!"
9


CHAPTER 3

Fernand gave a groan, which resembled a sob, and dropped
his head into his hands, his elbows leaning on the table.

THE CATALANS
Caderousse, whose countenance he scrutinized, to try and
detect whether the blow was premeditated; but he read
nothing but envy in a countenance already rendered brutal
and stupid by drunkenness.

"Well, Fernand, I must say," said Caderousse, beginning the
conversation, with that brutality of the common people in
which curiosity destroys all diplomacy, "you look
uncommonly like a rejected lover;" and he burst into a
"Well," said he, filling the glasses, "let us drink to Captain
hoarse laugh.
Edmond Dantes, husband of the beautiful Catalane!"
"Bah!" said Danglars, "a lad of his make was not born to be
Caderousse raised his glass to his mouth with unsteady
unhappy in love. You are laughing at him, Caderousse."
hand, and swallowed the contents at a gulp. Fernand dashed
"No," he replied, "only hark how he sighs! Come, come, his on the ground.
Fernand," said Caderousse, "hold up your head, and answer
"Eh, eh, eh!" stammered Caderousse. "What do I see down
us. It's not polite not to reply to friends who ask news of
there by the wall, in the direction of the Catalans? Look,
your health."
Fernand, your eyes are better than mine. I believe I see
"My health is well enough," said Fernand, clinching his double. You know wine is a deceiver; but I should say it was
hands without raising his head.
two lovers walking side by side, and hand in hand. Heaven
forgive me, they do not know that we can see them, and they
"Ah, you see, Danglars," said Caderousse, winking at his
are actually embracing!"
friend, "this is how it is; Fernand, whom you see here, is a
good and brave Catalan, one of the best fishermen in Danglars did not lose one pang that Fernand endured.
Marseilles, and he is in love with a very fine girl, named
"Do you know them, Fernand?" he said.
Mercedes; but it appears, unfortunately, that the fine girl is
in love with the mate of the Pharaon; and as the Pharaon "Yes," was the reply, in a low voice. "It is Edmond and
Mercedes!"
arrived to-day -- why, you understand!"
"No; I do not understand," said Danglars.
"Poor Fernand has been dismissed," continued Caderousse.
"Well, and what then?" said Fernand, lifting up his head, and
looking at Caderousse like a man who looks for some one on
whom to vent his anger; "Mercedes is not accountable to any
person, is she? Is she not free to love whomsoever she will?"

"Ah, see there, now!" said Caderousse; "and I did not
recognize them! Hallo, Dantes! hello, lovely damsel! Come
this way, and let us know when the wedding is to be, for
Fernand here is so obstinate he will not tell us."

"Hold your tongue, will you?" said Danglars, pretending to
restrain Caderousse, who, with the tenacity of drunkards,
leaned out of the arbor. "Try to stand upright, and let the
"Oh, if you take it in that sense," said Caderousse, "it is lovers make love without interruption. See, look at Fernand,
another thing. But I thought you were a Catalan, and they and follow his example; he is well-behaved!"
told me the Catalans were not men to allow themselves to be
Fernand, probably excited beyond bearing, pricked by
supplanted by a rival. It was even told me that Fernand,
Danglars, as the bull is by the bandilleros, was about to rush
especially, was terrible in his vengeance."
out; for he had risen from his seat, and seemed to be
Fernand smiled piteously. "A lover is never terrible," he said. collecting himself to dash headlong upon his rival, when
Mercedes, smiling and graceful, lifted up her lovely head,
"Poor fellow!" remarked Danglars, affecting to pity the
and looked at them with her clear and bright eyes. At this
young man from the bottom of his heart. "Why, you see, he
Fernand recollected her threat of dying if Edmond died, and
did not expect to see Dantes return so suddenly -- he thought
dropped again heavily on his seat. Danglars looked at the
he was dead, perhaps; or perchance faithless! These things
two men, one after the other, the one brutalized by liquor,
always come on us more severely when they come
the other overwhelmed with love.
suddenly."
"I shall get nothing from these fools," he muttered; "and I am
"Ah, ma foi, under any circumstances," said Caderousse,
very much afraid of being here between a drunkard and a
who drank as he spoke, and on whom the fumes of the wine
coward. Here's an envious fellow making himself boozy on
began to take effect, -- "under any circumstances Fernand is
wine when he ought to be nursing his wrath, and here is a
not the only person put out by the fortunate arrival of
fool who sees the woman he loves stolen from under his
Dantes; is he, Danglars?"
nose and takes on like a big baby. Yet this Catalan has eyes
that glisten like those of the vengeful Spaniards, Sicilians,
"No, you are right -- and I should say that would bring him and Calabrians, and the other has fists big enough to crush
an ox at one blow. Unquestionably, Edmond's star is in the
ill-luck."
ascendant, and he will marry the splendid girl -- he will be
"Well, never mind," answered Caderousse, pouring out a captain, too, and laugh at us all, unless" -- a sinister smile
glass of wine for Fernand, and filling his own for the eighth passed over Danglars' lips -- "unless I take a hand in the
or ninth time, while Danglars had merely sipped his. "Never affair," he added.
mind -- in the meantime he marries Mercedes -- the lovely
"Hallo!" continued Caderousse, half-rising, and with his fist
Mercedes -- at least he returns to do that."
on the table, "hallo, Edmond! do you not see your friends, or
During this time Danglars fixed his piercing glance on the are you too proud to speak to them?"
young man, on whose heart Caderousse's words fell like
"No, my dear fellow!" replied Dantes, "I am not proud, but I
molten lead.
am happy, and happiness blinds, I think, more than pride."
"And when is the wedding to be?" he asked.
"Ah, very well, that's an explanation!" said Caderousse.
"Oh, it is not yet fixed!" murmured Fernand.
"How do you do, Madame Dantes?"
"No, but it will be," said Caderousse, "as surely as Dantes Mercedes courtesied gravely, and said -- "That is not my
will be captain of the Pharaon -- eh, Danglars?"
name, and in my country it bodes ill fortune, they say, to call
Danglars shuddered at this unexpected attack, and turned to
10

a young girl by the name of her betrothed before he becomes

her husband. So call me Mercedes, if you please."
"We must excuse our worthy neighbor, Caderousse," said
Dantes, "he is so easily mistaken."
"So, then, the wedding is to take place immediately, M.
Dantes," said Danglars, bowing to the young couple.
"As soon as possible, M. Danglars; to-day all preliminaries
will be arranged at my father's, and to-morrow, or next day
at latest, the wedding festival here at La Reserve. My friends
will be there, I hope; that is to say, you are invited, M.
Danglars, and you, Caderousse."
"And Fernand," said Caderousse with a chuckle; "Fernand,
too, is invited!"
"My wife's brother is my brother," said Edmond; "and we,
Mercedes and I, should be very sorry if he were absent at
such a time."

"Your pardon," replied Danglars, "I merely said you seemed
in a hurry, and we have lots of time; the Pharaon cannot be
under weigh again in less than three months."
"We are always in a hurry to be happy, M. Danglars; for
when we have suffered a long time, we have great difficulty
in believing in good fortune. But it is not selfishness alone
that makes me thus in haste; I must go to Paris."
"Ah, really? -- to Paris! and will it be the first time you have
ever been there, Dantes?"
"Yes."
"Have you business there?"
"Not of my own; the last commission of poor Captain Leclere;
you know to what I allude, Danglars -- it is sacred. Besides, I
shall only take the time to go and return."

"Yes, yes, I understand," said Danglars, and then in a low
Fernand opened his mouth to reply, but his voice died on his tone, he added, "To Paris, no doubt to deliver the letter
lips, and he could not utter a word.
which the grand marshal gave him. Ah, this letter gives me
an idea -- a capital idea! Ah; Dantes, my friend, you are not
"To-day the preliminaries, to-morrow or next day the
yet registered number one on board the good ship Pharaon;"
ceremony! You are in a hurry, captain!"
then turning towards Edmond, who was walking away, "A
"Danglars," said Edmond, smiling, "I will say to you as pleasant journey," he cried.
Mercedes said just now to Caderousse, `Do not give me a
"Thank you," said Edmond with a friendly nod, and the two
title which does not belong to me'; that may bring me bad
lovers continued on their way, as calm and joyous as if they
luck."
were the very elect of heaven.

11


CHAPTER 4


Chapter 4

D

CONSPIRACY

Conspiracy

anglars followed Edmond and Mercedes with his eyes
until the two lovers disappeared behind one of the
angles of Fort Saint Nicolas, then turning round, he
perceived Fernand, who had fallen, pale and trembling, into
his chair, while Caderousse stammered out the words of a
drinking-song.

popular at the time, --

"Well, my dear sir," said Danglars to Fernand, "here is a
marriage which does not appear to make everybody happy."

"You said, sir, you would like to help me, but" --

"It drives me to despair," said Fernand.
"Do you, then, love Mercedes?"
"I adore her!"
"For long?"
"As long as I have known her -- always."
"And you sit there, tearing your hair, instead of seeking to
remedy your condition; I did not think that was the way of
your people."

`Tous les mechants sont beuveurs d'eau; C'est bien prouve
par le deluge.'*
* "The wicked are great drinkers of water As the flood
proved once for all."
"Yes; but I added, to help you it would be sufficient that
Dantes did not marry her you love; and the marriage may
easily be thwarted, methinks, and yet Dantes need not die."
"Death alone can separate them," remarked Fernand.
"You talk like a noodle, my friend," said Caderousse; "and
here is Danglars, who is a wide-awake, clever, deep fellow,
who will prove to you that you are wrong. Prove it, Danglars.
I have answered for you. Say there is no need why Dantes
should die; it would, indeed, be a pity he should. Dantes is a
good fellow; I like Dantes. Dantes, your health."

Fernand rose impatiently. "Let him run on," said Danglars,
restraining the young man; "drunk as he is, he is not much
"How do I know? Is it my affair? I am not in love with out in what he says. Absence severs as well as death, and if
Mademoiselle Mercedes; but for you -- in the words of the the walls of a prison were between Edmond and Mercedes
gospel, seek, and you shall find."
they would be as effectually separated as if he lay under a
tombstone."
"I have found already."
"What would you have me do?" said Fernand.

"Yes; but one gets out of prison," said Caderousse, who, with
what sense was left him, listened eagerly to the conversation,
"I would stab the man, but the woman told me that if any "and when one gets out and one's name is Edmond Dantes,
misfortune happened to her betrothed, she would kill one seeks revenge" -herself."
"What matters that?" muttered Fernand.
"Pooh! Women say those things, but never do them."
"And why, I should like to know," persisted Caderousse,
"You do not know Mercedes; what she threatens she will "should they put Dantes in prison? he has not robbed or
do."
killed or murdered."
"Idiot!" muttered Danglars; "whether she kill herself or not, "Hold your tongue!" said Danglars.
what matter, provided Dantes is not captain?"
"I won't hold my tongue!" replied Caderousse; "I say I want
"Before Mercedes should die," replied Fernand, with the to know why they should put Dantes in prison; I like Dantes;
accents of unshaken resolution, "I would die myself!"
Dantes, your health!" and he swallowed another glass of
"That's what I call love!" said Caderousse with a voice more wine.
tipsy than ever. "That's love, or I don't know what love is."
Danglars saw in the muddled look of the tailor the progress
"What?"

"Come," said Danglars, "you appear to me a good sort of
fellow, and hang me, I should like to help you, but" --

of his intoxication, and turning towards Fernand, said, "Well,
you understand there is no need to kill him."

"Yes," said Caderousse, "but how?"

"Certainly not, if, as you said just now, you have the means
of having Dantes arrested. Have you that means?"

"My dear fellow," replied Danglars, "you are three parts
drunk; finish the bottle, and you will be completely so. Drink "It is to be found for the searching. But why should I meddle
then, and do not meddle with what we are discussing, for in the matter? it is no affair of mine.";
that requires all one's wit and cool judgment."
"I know not why you meddle," said Fernand, seizing his arm;
"I -- drunk!" said Caderousse; "well that's a good one! I could "but this I know, you have some motive of personal hatred
drink four more such bottles; they are no bigger than against Dantes, for he who himself hates is never mistaken in
cologne flasks. Pere Pamphile, more wine!" and Caderousse the sentiments of others."
rattled his glass upon the table.
"I! -- motives of hatred against Dantes? None, on my word! I
saw you were unhappy, and your unhappiness interested
me; that's all; but since you believe I act for my own account,
adieu, my dear friend, get out of the affair as best you may;"
"What was I saying? I forget. This drunken Caderousse has
and Danglars rose as if he meant to depart.
made me lose the thread of my sentence."
"No, no," said Fernand, restraining him, "stay! It is of very
"Drunk, if you like; so much the worse for those who fear
little consequence to me at the end of the matter whether you
wine, for it is because they have bad thoughts which they are
have any angry feeling or not against Dantes. I hate him! I
afraid the liquor will extract from their hearts;" and
confess it openly. Do you find the means, I will execute it,
Caderousse began to sing the two last lines of a song very
"You were saving, sir" -- said Fernand, awaiting with great
anxiety the end of this interrupted remark.

12

provided it is not to kill the man, for Mercedes has declared
she will kill herself if Dantes is killed."
Caderousse, who had let his head drop on the table, now
raised it, and looking at Fernand with his dull and fishy eyes,
he said, -- "Kill Dantes! who talks of killing Dantes? I won't
have him killed -- I won't! He's my friend, and this morning
offered to share his money with me, as I shared mine with
him. I won't have Dantes killed -- I won't!"

"True!" said Fernand.
"No, no," continued Danglars; "if we resolve on such a step,
it would be much better to take, as I now do, this pen, dip it
into this ink, and write with the left hand (that the writing
may not be recognized) the denunciation we propose." And
Danglars, uniting practice with theory, wrote with his left
hand, and in a writing reversed from his usual style, and
totally unlike it, the following lines, which he handed to
Fernand, and which Fernand read in an undertone: --

"And who has said a word about killing him, muddlehead?"
replied Danglars. "We were merely joking; drink to his "The honorable, the king's attorney, is informed by a friend
health," he added, filling Caderousse's glass, "and do not of the throne and religion, that one Edmond Dantes, mate of
interfere with us."
the ship Pharaon, arrived this morning from Smyrna, after
having touched at Naples and Porto-Ferrajo, has been
"Yes, yes, Dantes' good health!" said Caderousse, emptying
intrusted by Murat with a letter for the usurper, and by the
his glass, "here's to his health! his health -- hurrah!"
usurper with a letter for the Bonapartist committee in Paris.
"But the means -- the means?" said Fernand.
Proof of this crime will be found on arresting him, for the
letter will be found upon him, or at his father's, or in his
"Have you not hit upon any?" asked Danglars.
cabin on board the Pharaon."
"No! -- you undertook to do so."
"Very good," resumed Danglars; "now your revenge looks
"True," replied Danglars; "the French have the superiority like common-sense, for in no way can it revert to yourself,
over the Spaniards, that the Spaniards ruminate, while the and the matter will thus work its own way; there is nothing
French invent."
to do now but fold the letter as I am doing, and write upon it,
`To the king's attorney,' and that's all settled." And Danglars
"Do you invent, then," said Fernand impatiently.
wrote the address as he spoke.
"Waiter," said Danglars, "pen, ink, and paper."
"Yes, and that's all settled!" exclaimed Caderousse, who, by a
"Pen, ink, and paper," muttered Fernand.
last effort of intellect, had followed the reading of the letter,
"Yes; I am a supercargo; pen, ink, and paper are my tools, and instinctively comprehended all the misery which such a
and without my tools I am fit for nothing."
denunciation must entail. "Yes, and that's all settled; only it
will be an infamous shame;" and he stretched out his hand to
"Pen, ink, and paper, then," called Fernand loudly.
reach the letter.
"There's what you want on that table," said the waiter.
"Yes," said Danglars, taking it from beyond his reach; "and as
"Bring them here." The waiter did as he was desired.
what I say and do is merely in jest, and I, amongst the first
"When one thinks," said Caderousse, letting his hand drop and foremost, should be sorry if anything happened to
on the paper, "there is here wherewithal to kill a man more Dantes -- the worthy Dantes -- look here!" And taking the
sure than if we waited at the corner of a wood to assassinate letter, he squeezed it up in his hands and threw it into a
him! I have always had more dread of a pen, a bottle of ink, corner of the arbor.
and a sheet of paper, than of a sword or pistol."
"All right!" said Caderousse. "Dantes is my friend, and I
"The fellow is not so drunk as he appears to be," said
Danglars. "Give him some more wine, Fernand." Fernand
filled Caderousse's glass, who, like the confirmed toper he
was, lifted his hand from the paper and seized the glass.
The Catalan watched him until Caderousse, almost
overcome by this fresh assault on his senses, rested, or rather
dropped, his glass upon the table.
"Well!" resumed the Catalan, as he saw the final glimmer of
Caderousse's reason vanishing before the last glass of wine.
"Well, then, I should say, for instance," resumed Danglars,
"that if after a voyage such as Dantes has just made, in which
he touched at the Island of Elba, some one were to denounce
him to the king's procureur as a Bonapartist agent" -"I will denounce him!" exclaimed the young man hastily.
"Yes, but they will make you then sign your declaration, and
confront you with him you have denounced; I will supply
you with the means of supporting your accusation, for I
know the fact well. But Dantes cannot remain forever in
prison, and one day or other he will leave it, and the day
when he comes out, woe betide him who was the cause of
his incarceration!"
"Oh, I should wish nothing better than that he would come
and seek a quarrel with me."

won't have him ill-used."
"And who thinks of using him ill? Certainly neither I nor
Fernand," said Danglars, rising and looking at the young
man, who still remained seated, but whose eye was fixed on
the denunciatory sheet of paper flung into the corner.
"In this case," replied Caderousse, "let's have some more
wine. I wish to drink to the health of Edmond and the lovely
Mercedes."
"You have had too much already, drunkard," said Danglars;
"and if you continue, you will be compelled to sleep here,
because unable to stand on your legs."
"I?" said Caderousse, rising with all the offended dignity of a
drunken man, "I can't keep on my legs? Why, I'll wager I can
go up into the belfry of the Accoules, and without staggering,
too!"
"Done!" said Danglars, "I'll take your bet; but to-morrow -to-day it is time to return. Give me your arm, and let us go."
"Very well, let us go," said Caderousse; "but I don't want
your arm at all. Come, Fernand, won't you return to
Marseilles with us?"
"No," said Fernand; "I shall return to the Catalans."
"You're wrong. Come with us to Marseilles -- come along."

"Yes, and Mercedes! Mercedes, who will detest you if you "I will not."
have only the misfortune to scratch the skin of her dearly "What do you mean? you will not? Well, just as you like, my
beloved Edmond!"
prince; there's liberty for all the world. Come along,
Danglars, and let the young gentleman return to the
13


CHAPTER 4

Catalans if he chooses."
Danglars took advantage of Caderousse's temper at the
moment, to take him off towards Marseilles by the Porte
Saint-Victor, staggering as he went.

CONSPIRACY
was going to the Catalans, and he is going to the city. Hallo,
Fernand!"
"Oh, you don't see straight," said Danglars; "he's gone right
enough."

When they had advanced about twenty yards, Danglars "Well," said Caderousse, "I should have said not -- how
looked back and saw Fernand stoop, pick up the crumpled treacherous wine is!"
paper, and putting it into his pocket then rush out of the
"Come, come," said Danglars to himself, "now the thing is at
arbor towards Pillon.
work and it will effect its purpose unassisted."
"Well," said Caderousse, "why, what a lie he told! He said he

14


Chapter 5

The Marriage-Feast

T

he morning's sun rose clear and resplendent, touching happiness, looking for all the world like one of the aged
the foamy waves into a network of ruby-tinted light.
dandies of 1796, parading the newly opened gardens of the
Tuileries and Luxembourg. Beside him glided Caderousse,
The feast had been made ready on the second floor at La
whose desire to partake of the good things provided for the
Reserve, with whose arbor the reader is already familiar. The
wedding-party had induced him to become reconciled to the
apartment destined for the purpose was spacious and
Dantes, father and son, although there still lingered in his
lighted by a number of windows, over each of which was
mind a faint and unperfect recollection of the events of the
written in golden letters for some inexplicable reason the
preceding night; just as the brain retains on waking in the
name of one of the principal cities of France; beneath these
morning the dim and misty outline of a dream.
windows a wooden balcony extended the entire length of the
house. And although the entertainment was fixed for twelve As Danglars approached the disappointed lover, he cast on
o'clock, an hour previous to that time the balcony was filled him a look of deep meaning, while Fernand, as he slowly
with impatient and expectant guests, consisting of the paced behind the happy pair, who seemed, in their own
favored part of the crew of the Pharaon, and other personal unmixed content, to have entirely forgotten that such a being
friends of the bride-groom, the whole of whom had arrayed as himself existed, was pale and abstracted; occasionally,
themselves in their choicest costumes, in order to do greater however, a deep flush would overspread his countenance,
honor to the occasion.
and a nervous contraction distort his features, while, with an
agitated and restless gaze, he would glance in the direction
Various rumors were afloat to the effect that the owners of
of Marseilles, like one who either anticipated or foresaw
the Pharaon had promised to attend the nuptial feast; but all
some great and important event.
seemed unanimous in doubting that an act of such rare and
exceeding condescension could possibly be intended.
Dantes himself was simply, but becomingly, clad in the dress
peculiar to the merchant service -- a costume somewhat
Danglars, however, who now made his appearance,
between a military and a civil garb; and with his fine
accompanied by Caderousse, effectually confirmed the
countenance, radiant with joy and happiness, a more perfect
report, stating that he had recently conversed with M.
specimen of manly beauty could scarcely be imagined.
Morrel, who had himself assured him of his intention to dine
at La Reserve.
Lovely as the Greek girls of Cyprus or Chios, Mercedes
boasted the same bright flashing eyes of jet, and ripe, round,
In fact, a moment later M. Morrel appeared and was saluted
coral lips. She moved with the light, free step of an
with an enthusiastic burst of applause from the crew of the
Arlesienne or an Andalusian. One more practiced in the arts
Pharaon, who hailed the visit of the shipowner as a sure
of great cities would have hid her blushes beneath a veil, or,
indication that the man whose wedding feast he thus
at least, have cast down her thickly fringed lashes, so as to
delighted to honor would ere long be first in command of
have concealed the liquid lustre of her animated eyes; but,
the ship; and as Dantes was universally beloved on board his
on the contrary, the delighted girl looked around her with a
vessel, the sailors put no restraint on their tumultuous joy at
smile that seemed to say: "If you are my friends, rejoice with
finding that the opinion and choice of their superiors so
me, for I am very happy."
exactly coincided with their own.
As soon as the bridal party came in sight of La Reserve, M.
With the entrance of M. Morrel, Danglars and Caderousse
Morrel descended and came forth to meet it, followed by the
were despatched in search of the bride-groom to convey to
soldiers and sailors there assembled, to whom he had
him the intelligence of the arrival of the important personage
repeated the promise already given, that Dantes should be
whose coming had created such a lively sensation, and to
the successor to the late Captain Leclere. Edmond, at the
beseech him to make haste.
approach of his patron, respectfully placed the arm of his
Danglars and Caderousse set off upon their errand at full affianced bride within that of M. Morrel, who, forthwith
speed; but ere they had gone many steps they perceived a conducting her up the flight of wooden steps leading to the
group advancing towards them, composed of the betrothed chamber in which the feast was prepared, was gayly
pair, a party of young girls in attendance on the bride, by followed by the guests, beneath whose heavy tread the slight
whose side walked Dantes' father; the whole brought up by structure creaked and groaned for the space of several
Fernand, whose lips wore their usual sinister smile.
minutes.
Neither Mercedes nor Edmond observed the strange
expression of his countenance; they were so happy that they
were conscious only of the sunshine and the presence of each
other.
Having acquitted themselves of their errand, and exchanged
a hearty shake of the hand with Edmond, Danglars and
Caderousse took their places beside Fernand and old Dantes,
-- the latter of whom attracted universal notice. The old man
was attired in a suit of glistening watered silk, trimmed with
steel buttons, beautifully cut and polished. His thin but wiry
legs were arrayed in a pair of richly embroidered clocked
stockings, evidently of English manufacture, while from his
three-cornered hat depended a long streaming knot of white
and blue ribbons. Thus he came along, supporting himself
on a curiously carved stick, his aged countenance lit up with

"Father," said Mercedes, stopping when she had reached the
centre of the table, "sit, I pray you, on my right hand; on my
left I will place him who has ever been as a brother to me,"
pointing with a soft and gentle smile to Fernand; but her
words and look seemed to inflict the direst torture on him,
for his lips became ghastly pale, and even beneath the dark
hue of his complexion the blood might be seen retreating as
though some sudden pang drove it back to the heart.
During this time, Dantes, at the opposite side of the table,
had been occupied in similarly placing his most honored
guests. M. Morrel was seated at his right hand, Danglars at
his left; while, at a sign from Edmond, the rest of the
company ranged themselves as they found it most agreeable.
Then they began to pass around the dusky, piquant, Arlesian
15


CHAPTER 5


THE MARRIAGE-FEAST

sausages, and lobsters in their dazzling red cuirasses,
prawns of large size and brilliant color, the echinus with its
prickly outside and dainty morsel within, the clovis,
esteemed by the epicures of the South as more than rivalling
the exquisite flavor of the oyster, -- all the delicacies, in fact,
that are cast up by the wash of waters on the sandy beach,
and styled by the grateful fishermen "fruits of the sea."
"A pretty silence truly!" said the old father of the
bride-groom, as he carried to his lips a glass of wine of the
hue and brightness of the topaz, and which had just been
placed before Mercedes herself. "Now, would anybody think
that this room contained a happy, merry party, who desire
nothing better than to laugh and dance the hours away?"
"Ah," sighed Caderousse, "a man cannot always feel happy
because he is about to be married."
"The truth is," replied Dantes, "that I am too happy for noisy
mirth; if that is what you meant by your observation, my
worthy friend, you are right; joy takes a strange effect at
times, it seems to oppress us almost the same as sorrow."
Danglars looked towards Fernand, whose excitable nature
received and betrayed each fresh impression.
"Why, what ails you?" asked he of Edmond. "Do you fear
any approaching evil? I should say that you were the
happiest man alive at this instant."

his efforts, he could not refrain from uttering a deep groan,
which, however, was lost amid the noisy felicitations of the
company.
"Upon my word," cried the old man, "you make short work
of this kind of affair. Arrived here only yesterday morning,
and married to-day at three o'clock! Commend me to a sailor
for going the quick way to work!"
"But," asked Danglars, in a timid tone, "how did you manage
about the other formalities -- the contract -- the settlement?"
"The contract," answered Dantes, laughingly, "it didn't take
long to fix that. Mercedes has no fortune; I have none to
settle on her. So, you see, our papers were quickly written
out, and certainly do not come very expensive." This joke
elicited a fresh burst of applause.
"So that what we presumed to be merely the betrothal feast
turns out to be the actual wedding dinner!" said Danglars.
"No, no," answered Dantes; "don't imagine I am going to put
you off in that shabby manner. To-morrow morning I start
for Paris; four days to go, and the same to return, with one
day to discharge the commission intrusted to me, is all the
time I shall be absent. I shall be back here by the first of
March, and on the second I give my real marriage feast."

This prospect of fresh festivity redoubled the hilarity of the
guests to such a degree, that the elder Dantes, who, at the
"And that is the very thing that alarms me," returned Dantes. commencement of the repast, had commented upon the
"Man does not appear to me to be intended to enjoy felicity silence that prevailed, now found it difficult, amid the
so unmixed; happiness is like the enchanted palaces we read general din of voices, to obtain a moment's tranquillity in
of in our childhood, where fierce, fiery dragons defend the which to drink to the health and prosperity of the bride and
entrance and approach; and monsters of all shapes and kinds, bride-groom.
requiring to be overcome ere victory is ours. I own that I am
Dantes, perceiving the affectionate eagerness of his father,
lost in wonder to find myself promoted to an honor of which
responded by a look of grateful pleasure; while Mercedes
I feel myself unworthy -- that of being the husband of
glanced at the clock and made an expressive gesture to
Mercedes."
Edmond.
"Nay, nay!" cried Caderousse, smiling, "you have not
Around the table reigned that noisy hilarity which usually
attained that honor yet. Mercedes is not yet your wife. Just
prevails at such a time among people sufficiently free from
assume the tone and manner of a husband, and see how she
the demands of social position not to feel the trammels of
will remind you that your hour is not yet come!"
etiquette. Such as at the commencement of the repast had
The bride blushed, while Fernand, restless and uneasy, not been able to seat themselves according to their
seemed to start at every fresh sound, and from time to time inclination rose unceremoniously, and sought out more
wiped away the large drops of perspiration that gathered on agreeable companions. Everybody talked at once, without
his brow.
waiting for a reply and each one seemed to be contented
with expressing his or her own thoughts.
"Well, never mind that, neighbor Caderousse; it is not worth
while to contradict me for such a trifle as that. 'Tis true that Fernand's paleness appeared to have communicated itself to
Mercedes is not actually my wife; but," added he, drawing Danglars. As for Fernand himself, he seemed to be enduring
out his watch, "in an hour and a half she will be."
the tortures of the damned; unable to rest, he was among the
first to quit the table, and, as though seeking to avoid the
A general exclamation of surprise ran round the table, with
hilarious mirth that rose in such deafening sounds, he
the exception of the elder Dantes, whose laugh displayed the
continued, in utter silence, to pace the farther end of the
still perfect beauty of his large white teeth. Mercedes looked
salon.
pleased and gratified, while Fernand grasped the handle of
his knife with a convulsive clutch.
Caderousse approached him just as Danglars, whom
Fernand seemed most anxious to avoid, had joined him in a
"In an hour?" inquired Danglars, turning pale. "How is that,
corner of the room.
my friend?"
"Upon my word," said Caderousse, from whose mind the
"Why, thus it is," replied Dantes. "Thanks to the influence of
friendly treatment of Dantes, united with the effect of the
M. Morrel, to whom, next to my father, I owe every blessing
excellent wine he had partaken of, had effaced every feeling
I enjoy, every difficulty his been removed. We have
of envy or jealousy at Dantes' good fortune, -- "upon my
purchased permission to waive the usual delay; and at
word, Dantes is a downright good fellow, and when I see
half-past two o'clock the mayor of Marseilles will be waiting
him sitting there beside his pretty wife that is so soon to be. I
for us at the city hall. Now, as a quarter-past one has already
cannot help thinking it would have been a great pity to have
struck, I do not consider I have asserted too much in saying,
served him that trick you were planning yesterday."
that, in another hour and thirty minutes Mercedes will have
become Madame Dantes."
"Oh, there was no harm meant," answered Danglars; "at first
I certainly did feel somewhat uneasy as to what Fernand
Fernand closed his eyes, a burning sensation passed across
might be tempted to do; but when I saw how completely he
his brow, and he was compelled to support himself by the
had mastered his feelings, even so far as to become one of his
table to prevent his falling from his chair; but in spite of all
16

rival's attendants, I knew there was no further cause for firm in his duty, he kindly said, "My worthy friend, let me
apprehension." Caderousse looked full at Fernand -- he was beg of you to calm your apprehensions. Your son has
ghastly pale.
probably neglected some prescribed form or attention in
registering his cargo, and it is more than probable he will be
"Certainly," continued Danglars, "the sacrifice was no trifling
set at liberty directly he has given the information required,
one, when the beauty of the bride is concerned. Upon my
whether touching the health of his crew, or the value of his
soul, that future captain of mine is a lucky dog! Gad, I only
freight."
wish he would let me take his place."
"What is the meaning of all this?" inquired Caderousse,
"Shall we not set forth?" asked the sweet, silvery voice of
frowningly, of Danglars, who had assumed an air of utter
Mercedes; "two o'clock has just struck, and you know we are
surprise.
expected in a quarter of an hour."
"How can I tell you?" replied he; "I am, like yourself, utterly
"To be sure! -- to be sure!" cried Dantes, eagerly quitting the
bewildered at all that is going on, and cannot in the least
table; "let us go directly!"
make out what it is about." Caderousse then looked around
His words were re-echoed by the whole party, with for Fernand, but he had disappeared.
vociferous cheers.
The scene of the previous night now came back to his mind
At this moment Danglars, who had been incessantly with startling clearness. The painful catastrophe he had just
observing every change in Fernand's look and manner, saw witnessed appeared effectually to have rent away the veil
him stagger and fall back, with an almost convulsive spasm, which the intoxication of the evening before had raised
against a seat placed near one of the open windows. At the between himself and his memory.
same instant his ear caught a sort of indistinct sound on the
"So, so," said he, in a hoarse and choking voice, to Danglars,
stairs, followed by the measured tread of soldiery, with the
"this, then, I suppose, is a part of the trick you were
clanking of swords and military accoutrements; then came a
concerting yesterday? All I can say is, that if it be so, 'tis an ill
hum and buzz as of many voices, so as to deaden even the
turn, and well deserves to bring double evil on those who
noisy mirth of the bridal party, among whom a vague feeling
have projected it."
of curiosity and apprehension quelled every disposition to
talk, and almost instantaneously the most deathlike stillness "Nonsense," returned Danglars, "I tell you again I have
prevailed.
nothing whatever to do with it; besides, you know very well
that I tore the paper to pieces."
The sounds drew nearer. Three blows were struck upon the
panel of the door. The company looked at each other in "No, you did not!" answered Caderousse, "you merely threw
consternation.
it by -- I saw it lying in a corner."
"I demand admittance," said a loud voice outside the room,
"in the name of the law!" As no attempt was made to prevent
it, the door was opened, and a magistrate, wearing his
official scarf, presented himself, followed by four soldiers
and a corporal. Uneasiness now yielded to the most extreme
dread on the part of those present.
"May I venture to inquire the reason of this unexpected
visit?" said M. Morrel, addressing the magistrate, whom he
evidently knew; "there is doubtless some mistake easily
explained."

"Hold your tongue, you fool! -- what should you know about
it? -- why, you were drunk!"
"Where is Fernand?" inquired Caderousse.
"How do I know?" replied Danglars; "gone, as every prudent
man ought to be, to look after his own affairs, most likely.
Never mind where he is, let you and I go and see what is to
be done for our poor friends."

During this conversation, Dantes, after having exchanged a
cheerful shake of the hand with all his sympathizing friends,
had surrendered himself to the officer sent to arrest him,
"If it be so," replied the magistrate, "rely upon every
merely saying, "Make yourselves quite easy, my good
reparation being made; meanwhile, I am the bearer of an
fellows, there is some little mistake to clear up, that's all,
order of arrest, and although I most reluctantly perform the
depend upon it; and very likely I may not have to go so far
task assigned me, it must, nevertheless, be fulfilled. Who
as the prison to effect that."
among the persons here assembled answers to the name of
Edmond Dantes?" Every eye was turned towards the young "Oh, to be sure!" responded Danglars, who had now
man who, spite of the agitation he could not but feel, approached the group, "nothing more than a mistake, I feel
advanced with dignity, and said, in a firm voice, "I am he; quite certain."
what is your pleasure with me?"
Dantes descended the staircase, preceded by the magistrate,
"Edmond Dantes," replied the magistrate, "I arrest you in the
name of the law!"
"Me!" repeated Edmond, slightly changing color, "and
wherefore, I pray?"
"I cannot inform you, but you will be duly acquainted with
the reasons that have rendered such a step necessary at the
preliminary examination."

and followed by the soldiers. A carriage awaited him at the
door; he got in, followed by two soldiers and the magistrate,
and the vehicle drove off towards Marseilles.
"Adieu, adieu, dearest Edmond!" cried Mercedes, stretching
out her arms to him from the balcony.

The prisoner heard the cry, which sounded like the sob of a
broken heart, and leaning from the coach he called out,
"Good-by, Mercedes -- we shall soon meet again!" Then the
M. Morrel felt that further resistance or remonstrance was
vehicle disappeared round one of the turnings of Fort Saint
useless. He saw before him an officer delegated to enforce
Nicholas.
the law, and perfectly well knew that it would be as
unavailing to seek pity from a magistrate decked with his "Wait for me here, all of you!" cried M. Morrel; "I will take
official scarf, as to address a petition to some cold marble the first conveyance I find, and hurry to Marseilles, whence I
effigy. Old Dantes, however, sprang forward. There are will bring you word how all is going on."
situations which the heart of a father or a mother cannot be "That's right!" exclaimed a multitude of voices, "go, and
made to understand. He prayed and supplicated in terms so return as quickly as you can!"
moving, that even the officer was touched, and, although
17


CHAPTER 5


THE MARRIAGE-FEAST

This second departure was followed by a long and fearful
state of terrified silence on the part of those who were left
behind. The old father and Mercedes remained for some
time apart, each absorbed in grief; but at length the two poor
victims of the same blow raised their eyes, and with a
simultaneous burst of feeling rushed into each other's arms.

and greeted him at the door. He was very pale.

Meanwhile Fernand made his appearance, poured out for
himself a glass of water with a trembling hand; then hastily
swallowing it, went to sit down at the first vacant place, and
this was, by mere chance, placed next to the seat on which
poor Mercedes had fallen half fainting, when released from
the warm and affectionate embrace of old Dantes.
Instinctively Fernand drew back his chair.

"Oh, indeed -- indeed, sir, he is innocent!" sobbed forth
Mercedes.

"What news?" exclaimed a general burst of voices.
"Alas, my friends," replied M. Morrel, with a mournful shake
of his head, "the thing has assumed a more serious aspect
than I expected."

"That I believe!" answered M. Morrel; "but still he is charged"
-"With what?" inquired the elder Dantes.

"With being an agent of the Bonapartist faction!" Many of
"He is the cause of all this misery -- I am quite sure of it," our readers may be able to recollect how formidable such an
whispered Caderousse, who had never taken his eyes off accusation became in the period at which our story is dated.
Fernand, to Danglars.
A despairing cry escaped the pale lips of Mercedes; the old
"I don't think so," answered the other; he's too stupid to man sank into a chair.
imagine such a scheme. I only hope the mischief will fall "Ah, Danglars!" whispered Caderousse, "you have deceived
upon the head of whoever wrought it."
me -- the trick you spoke of last night has been played; but I
"You don't mention those who aided and abetted the deed," cannot suffer a poor old man or an innocent girl to die of
grief through your fault. I am determined to tell them all
said Caderousse.
about it."
"Surely," answered Danglars, "one cannot be held
"Be silent, you simpleton!" cried Danglars, grasping him by
responsible for every chance arrow shot into the air."
the arm, "or I will not answer even for your own safety. Who
"You can, indeed, when the arrow lights point downward on can tell whether Dantes be innocent or guilty? The vessel did
somebody's head."
touch at Elba, where he quitted it, and passed a whole day in
Meantime the subject of the arrest was being canvassed in the island. Now, should any letters or other documents of a
compromising character be found upon him, will it not be
every different form.
taken for granted that all who uphold him are his
"What think you, Danglars," said one of the party, turning
accomplices?"
towards him, "of this event?"
With the rapid instinct of selfishness, Caderousse readily
"Why," replied he, "I think it just possible Dantes may have
perceived the solidity of this mode of reasoning; he gazed,
been detected with some trifling article on board ship
doubtfully, wistfully, on Danglars, and then caution
considered here as contraband."
supplanted generosity.
"But how could he have done so without your knowledge,
"Suppose we wait a while, and see what comes of it," said he,
Danglars, since you are the ship's supercargo?"
casting a bewildered look on his companion.
"Why, as for that, I could only know what I was told
"To be sure!" answered Danglars. "Let us wait, by all means.
respecting the merchandise with which the vessel was laden.
If he be innocent, of course he will be set at liberty; if guilty,
I know she was loaded with cotton, and that she took in her
why, it is no use involving ourselves in a conspiracy."
freight at Alexandria from Pastret's warehouse, and at
Smyrna from Pascal's; that is all I was obliged to know, and I "Let us go, then. I cannot stay here any longer."
beg I may not be asked for any further particulars."
"With all my heart!" replied Danglars, pleased to find the
"Now I recollect," said the afflicted old father; "my poor boy
told me yesterday he had got a small case of coffee, and
another of tobacco for me!"
"There, you see," exclaimed Danglars. "Now the mischief is
out; depend upon it the custom-house people went
rummaging about the ship in our absence, and discovered
poor Dantes' hidden treasures."
Mercedes, however, paid no heed to this explanation of her
lover's arrest. Her grief, which she had hitherto tried to
restrain, now burst out in a violent fit of hysterical sobbing.
"Come, come," said the old man, "be comforted, my poor
child; there is still hope!"
"Hope!" repeated Danglars.
"Hope!" faintly murmured Fernand, but the word seemed to
die away on his pale agitated lips, and a convulsive spasm
passed over his countenance.
"Good news! good news!" shouted forth one of the party
stationed in the balcony on the lookout. "Here comes M.
Morrel back. No doubt, now, we shall hear that our friend is
released!"
Mercedes and the old man rushed to meet the shipowner
18

other so tractable. "Let us take ourselves out of the way, and
leave things for the present to take their course."
After their departure, Fernand, who had now again become
the friend and protector of Mercedes, led the girl to her
home, while the friends of Dantes conducted the now
half-fainting man back to his abode.
The rumor of Edmond arrest as a Bonapartist agent was not
slow in circulating throughout the city.
"Could you ever have credited such a thing, my dear
Danglars?" asked M. Morrel, as, on his return to the port for
the purpose of gleaning fresh tidings of Dantes, from M. de
Villefort, the assistant procureur, he overtook his supercargo
and Caderousse. "Could you have believed such a thing
possible?"
"Why, you know I told you," replied Danglars, "that I
considered the circumstance of his having anchored at the
Island of Elba as a very suspicious circumstance."
"And did you mention these suspicions to any person beside
myself?"
"Certainly not!" returned Danglars. Then added in a low
whisper, "You understand that, on account of your uncle, M.
Policar Morrel, who served under the other government, and

who does not altogether conceal what he thinks on the
subject, you are strongly suspected of regretting the
abdication of Napoleon. I should have feared to injure both
Edmond and yourself, had I divulged my own
apprehensions to a soul. I am too well aware that though a
subordinate, like myself, is bound to acquaint the shipowner
with everything that occurs, there are many things he ought
most carefully to conceal from all else."

"Perhaps not," replied Danglars; "but I hear that he is
ambitions, and that's rather against him."
"Well, well," returned M. Morrel, "we shall see. But now
hasten on board, I will join you there ere long." So saying,
the worthy shipowner quitted the two allies, and proceeded
in the direction of the Palais de Justice.

"You see," said Danglars, addressing Caderousse, "the turn
things have taken. Do you still feel any desire to stand up in
"'Tis well, Danglars -- 'tis well!" replied M. Morrel. "You are a
his defence?"
worthy fellow; and I had already thought of your interests in
the event of poor Edmond having become captain of the "Not the slightest, but yet it seems to me a shocking thing
that a mere joke should lead to such consequences."
Pharaon."
"But who perpetrated that joke, let me ask? neither you nor
myself, but Fernand; you knew very well that I threw the
"Yes, indeed; I had previously inquired of Dantes what was
paper into a corner of the room -- indeed, I fancied I had
his opinion of you, and if he should have any reluctance to
destroyed it."
continue you in your post, for somehow I have perceived a
"Oh, no," replied Caderousse, "that I can answer for, you did
sort of coolness between you."
not. I only wish I could see it now as plainly as I saw it lying
"And what was his reply?"
all crushed and crumpled in a corner of the arbor."
"That he certainly did think he had given you offence in an
"Well, then, if you did, depend upon it, Fernand picked it up,
affair which he merely referred to without entering into
and either copied it or caused it to be copied; perhaps, even,
particulars, but that whoever possessed the good opinion
he did not take the trouble of recopying it. And now I think
and confidence of the ship's owner would have his
of it, by Heavens, he may have sent the letter itself!
preference also."
Fortunately, for me, the handwriting was disguised."
"The hypocrite!" murmured Danglars.
"Then you were aware of Dantes being engaged in a
"Poor Dantes!" said Caderousse. "No one can deny his being conspiracy?"
a noble-hearted young fellow."
"Not I. As I before said, I thought the whole thing was a joke,
"But meanwhile," continued M. Morrel, "here is the Pharaon nothing more. It seems, however, that I have unconsciously
without a captain."
stumbled upon the truth."
"Is it possible you were so kind?"

"Oh," replied Danglars, "since we cannot leave this port for "Still," argued Caderousse, "I would give a great deal if
the next three months, let us hope that ere the expiration of nothing of the kind had happened; or, at least, that I had had
that period Dantes will be set at liberty."
no hand in it. You will see, Danglars, that it will turn out an
unlucky job for both of us."
"No doubt; but in the meantime?"
"Nonsense! If any harm come of it, it should fall on the guilty
"I am entirely at your service, M. Morrel," answered
person; and that, you know, is Fernand. How can we be
Danglars. "You know that I am as capable of managing a
implicated in any way? All we have got to do is, to keep our
ship as the most experienced captain in the service; and it
own counsel, and remain perfectly quiet, not breathing a
will be so far advantageous to you to accept my services, that
word to any living soul; and you will see that the storm will
upon Edmond's release from prison no further change will
pass away without in the least affecting us."
be requisite on board the Pharaon than for Dantes and
myself each to resume our respective posts."
"Amen!" responded Caderousse, waving his hand in token of
adieu to Danglars, and bending his steps towards the Allees
"Thanks, Danglars -- that will smooth over all difficulties. I
de Meillan, moving his head to and fro, and muttering as he
fully authorize you at once to assume the command of the
went, after the manner of one whose mind was overcharged
Pharaon, and look carefully to the unloading of her freight.
with one absorbing idea.
Private misfortunes must never be allowed to interfere with
business."
"So far, then," said Danglars, mentally, "all has gone as I
would have it. I am, temporarily, commander of the Pharaon,
"Be easy on that score, M. Morrel; but do you think we shall
with the certainty of being permanently so, if that fool of a
be permitted to see our poor Edmond?"
Caderousse can be persuaded to hold his tongue. My only
"I will let you know that directly I have seen M. de Villefort, fear is the chance of Dantes being released. But, there, he is
whom I shall endeavor to interest in Edmond's favor. I am in the hands of Justice; and," added he with a smile, "she will
aware he is a furious royalist; but, in spite of that, and of his take her own." So saying, he leaped into a boat, desiring to
being king's attorney, he is a man like ourselves, and I fancy be rowed on board the Pharaon, where M. Morrel had
not a bad sort of one."
agreed to meet him.

19


CHAPTER 6


Chapter 6

THE DEPUTY PROCUREUR DU ROI

The Deputy Procureur Du Roi

I

n one of the aristocratic mansions built by Puget in the
Rue du Grand Cours opposite the Medusa fountain, a
second marriage feast was being celebrated, almost at the
same hour with the nuptial repast given by Dantes. In this
case, however, although the occasion of the entertainment
was similar, the company was strikingly dissimilar. Instead
of a rude mixture of sailors, soldiers, and those belonging to
the humblest grade of life, the present assembly was
composed of the very flower of Marseilles society, -magistrates who had resigned their office during the
usurper's reign; officers who had deserted from the imperial
army and joined forces with Conde; and younger members
of families, brought up to hate and execrate the man whom
five years of exile would convert into a martyr, and fifteen of
restoration elevate to the rank of a god.
The guests were still at table, and the heated and energetic
conversation that prevailed betrayed the violent and
vindictive passions that then agitated each dweller of the
South, where unhappily, for five centuries religious strife
had long given increased bitterness to the violence of party
feeling.
The emperor, now king of the petty Island of Elba, after
having held sovereign sway over one-half of the world,
counting as his subjects a small population of five or six
thousand souls, -- after having been accustomed to hear the
"Vive Napoleons" of a hundred and twenty millions of
human beings, uttered in ten different languages, -- was
looked upon here as a ruined man, separated forever from
any fresh connection with France or claim to her throne.
The magistrates freely discussed their political views; the
military part of the company talked unreservedly of Moscow
and Leipsic, while the women commented on the divorce of
Josephine. It was not over the downfall of the man, but over
the defeat of the Napoleonic idea, that they rejoiced, and in
this they foresaw for themselves the bright and cheering
prospect of a revivified political existence.
An old man, decorated with the cross of Saint Louis, now
rose and proposed the health of King Louis XVIII. It was the
Marquis de Saint-Meran. This toast, recalling at once the
patient exile of Hartwell and the peace-loving King of France,
excited universal enthusiasm; glasses were elevated in the
air a l'Anglais, and the ladies, snatching their bouquets from
their fair bosoms, strewed the table with their floral treasures.
In a word, an almost poetical fervor prevailed.
"Ah," said the Marquise de Saint-Meran, a woman with a
stern, forbidding eye, though still noble and distinguished in
appearance, despite her fifty years -- "ah, these revolutionists,
who have driven us from those very possessions they
afterwards purchased for a mere trifle during the Reign of
Terror, would be compelled to own, were they here, that all
true devotion was on our side, since we were content to
follow the fortunes of a falling monarch, while they, on the
contrary, made their fortune by worshipping the rising sun;
yes, yes, they could not help admitting that the king, for
whom we sacrificed rank, wealth, and station was truly our
`Louis the well-beloved,' while their wretched usurper his
been, and ever will be, to them their evil genius, their
`Napoleon the accursed.' Am I not right, Villefort?"

conversation."
"Marquise, marquise!" interposed the old nobleman who had
proposed the toast, "let the young people alone; let me tell
you, on one's wedding day there are more agreeable subjects
of conversation than dry politics."
"Never mind, dearest mother," said a young and lovely girl,
with a profusion of light brown hair, and eyes that seemed to
float in liquid crystal, "'tis all my fault for seizing upon M. de
Villefort, so as to prevent his listening to what you said. But
there -- now take him -- he is your own for as long as you
like. M. Villefort, I beg to remind you my mother speaks to
you."
"If the marquise will deign to repeat the words I but
imperfectly caught, I shall be delighted to answer," said M.
de Villefort.
"Never mind, Renee," replied the marquise, with a look of
tenderness that seemed out of keeping with her harsh dry
features; but, however all other feelings may be withered in
a woman's nature, there is always one bright smiling spot in
the desert of her heart, and that is the shrine of maternal love.
"I forgive you. What I was saying, Villefort, was, that the
Bonapartists had not our sincerity, enthusiasm, or devotion."
"They had, however, what supplied the place of those fine
qualities," replied the young man, "and that was fanaticism.
Napoleon is the Mahomet of the West, and is worshipped by
his commonplace but ambitions followers, not only as a
leader and lawgiver, but also as the personification of
equality."
"He!" cried the marquise: "Napoleon the type of equality! For
mercy's sake, then, what would you call Robespierre? Come,
come, do not strip the latter of his just rights to bestow them
on the Corsican, who, to my mind, has usurped quite
enough."
"Nay, madame; I would place each of these heroes on his
right pedestal -- that of Robespierre on his scaffold in the
Place Louis Quinze; that of Napoleon on the column of the
Place Vendome. The only difference consists in the opposite
character of the equality advocated by these two men; one is
the equality that elevates, the other is the equality that
degrades; one brings a king within reach of the guillotine,
the other elevates the people to a level with the throne.
Observe," said Villefort, smiling, "I do not mean to deny that
both these men were revolutionary scoundrels, and that the
9th Thermidor and the 4th of April, in the year 1814, were
lucky days for France, worthy of being gratefully
remembered by every friend to monarchy and civil order;
and that explains how it comes to pass that, fallen, as I trust
he is forever, Napoleon has still retained a train of parasitical
satellites. Still, marquise, it has been so with other usurpers
-- Cromwell, for instance, who was not half so bad as
Napoleon, had his partisans and advocates."
"Do you know, Villefort, that you are talking in a most
dreadfully revolutionary strain? But I excuse it, it is
impossible to expect the son of a Girondin to be free from a
small spice of the old leaven." A deep crimson suffused the
countenance of Villefort.

"'Tis true, madame," answered he, "that my father was a
"I beg your pardon, madame. I really must pray you to Girondin, but he was not among the number of those who
excuse me, but -- in truth -- I was not attending to the voted for the king's death; he was an equal sufferer with
20

yourself during the Reign of Terror, and had well-nigh lost "To Saint Helena."
his head on the same scaffold on which your father
"For heaven's sake, where is that?" asked the marquise.
perished."
"An island situated on the other side of the equator, at least
"True," replied the marquise, without wincing in the slightest
two thousand leagues from here," replied the count.
degree at the tragic remembrance thus called up; "but bear in
mind, if you please, that our respective parents underwent "So much the better. As Villefort observes, it is a great act of
persecution and proscription from diametrically opposite folly to have left such a man between Corsica, where he was
principles; in proof of which I may remark, that while my born, and Naples, of which his brother-in-law is king, and
family remained among the stanchest adherents of the exiled face to face with Italy, the sovereignty of which he coveted
princes, your father lost no time in joining the new for his son."
government; and that while the Citizen Noirtier was a "Unfortunately," said Villefort, "there are the treaties of 1814,
Girondin, the Count Noirtier became a senator."
and we cannot molest Napoleon without breaking those
"Dear mother," interposed Renee, "you know very well it compacts."
was agreed that all these disagreeable reminiscences should "Oh, well, we shall find some way out of it," responded M.
forever be laid aside."
de Salvieux. "There wasn't any trouble over treaties when it
"Suffer me, also, madame," replied Villefort, "to add my was a question of shooting the poor Duc d'Enghien."
earnest request to Mademoiselle de Saint-Meran's, that you "Well," said the marquise, "it seems probable that, by the aid
will kindly allow the veil of oblivion to cover and conceal the of the Holy Alliance, we shall be rid of Napoleon; and we
past. What avails recrimination over matters wholly past must trust to the vigilance of M. de Villefort to purify
recall? For my own part, I have laid aside even the name of Marseilles of his partisans. Tbe king is either a king or no
my father, and altogether disown his political principles. He king; if he be acknowledged as sovereign of France, he
was -- nay, probably may still be -- a Bonapartist, and is should be upheld in peace and tranquillity; and this can best
called Noirtier; I, on the contrary, am a stanch royalist, and be effected by employing the most inflexible agents to put
style myself de Villefort. Let what may remain of down every attempt at conspiracy -- 'tis the best and surest
revolutionary sap exhaust itself and die away with the old means of preventing mischief."
trunk, and condescend only to regard the young shoot which
has started up at a distance from the parent tree, without "Unfortunately, madame," answered Villefort, "the strong
having the power, any more than the wish, to separate arm of the law is not called upon to interfere until the evil
has taken place."
entirely from the stock from which it sprung."
"Bravo, Villefort!" cried the marquis; "excellently well said! "Then all he has got to do is to endeavor to repair it."
Come, now, I have hopes of obtaining what I have been for "Nay, madame, the law is frequently powerless to effect this;
years endeavoring to persuade the marquise to promise; all it can do is to avenge the wrong done."
namely, a perfect amnesty and forgetfulness of the past."
"Oh, M. de Villefort," cried a beautiful young creature,
"With all my heart," replied the marquise; "let the past be daughter to the Comte de Salvieux, and the cherished friend
forever forgotten. I promise you it affords me as little of Mademoiselle de Saint-Meran, "do try and get up some
pleasure to revive it as it does you. All I ask is, that Villefort famous trial while we are at Marseilles. I never was in a
will be firm and inflexible for the future in his political law-court; I am told it is so very amusing!"
principles. Remember, also, Villefort, that we have pledged
"Amusing, certainly," replied the young man, "inasmuch as,
ourselves to his majesty for your fealty and strict loyalty, and
instead of shedding tears as at the fictitious tale of woe
that at our recommendation the king consented to forget the
produced at a theatre, you behold in a law-court a case of
past, as I do" (and here she extended to him her hand) -- "as I
real and genuine distress -- a drama of life. The prisoner
now do at your entreaty. But bear in mind, that should there
whom you there see pale, agitated, and alarmed, instead of -fall in your way any one guilty of conspiring against the
as is the case when a curtain falls on a tragedy -- going home
government, you will be so much the more bound to visit
to sup peacefully with his family, and then retiring to rest,
the offence with rigorous punishment, as it is known you
that he may recommence his mimic woes on the morrow, -belong to a suspected family."
is removed from your sight merely to be reconducted to his
"Alas, madame," returned Villefort, "my profession, as well prison and delivered up to the executioner. I leave you to
as the times in which we live, compels me to be severe. I judge how far your nerves are calculated to bear you
have already successfully conducted several public through such a scene. Of this, however, be assured, that
prosecutions, and brought the offenders to merited should any favorable opportunity present itself, I will not
punishment. But we have not done with the thing yet."
fail to offer you the choice of being present."
"Do you, indeed, think so?" inquired the marquise.
"I am, at least, fearful of it. Napoleon, in the Island of Elba, is
too near France, and his proximity keeps up the hopes of his
partisans. Marseilles is filled with half-pay officers, who are
daily, under one frivolous pretext or other, getting up
quarrels with the royalists; from hence arise continual and
fatal duels among the higher classes of persons, and
assassinations in the lower."

"For shame, M. de Villefort!" said Renee, becoming quite
pale; "don't you see how you are frightening us? -- and yet
you laugh."
"What would you have? 'Tis like a duel. I have already
recorded sentence of death, five or six times, against the
movers of political conspiracies, and who can say how many
daggers may be ready sharpened, and only waiting a
favorable opportunity to be buried in my heart?"

"You have heard, perhaps," said the Comte de Salvieux, one "Gracious heavens, M. de Villefort," said Renee, becoming
of M. de Saint-Meran's oldest friends, and chamberlain to the more and more terrified; "you surely are not in earnest."
Comte d'Artois, "that the Holy Alliance purpose removing
"Indeed I am," replied the young magistrate with a smile;
him from thence?"
"and in the interesting trial that young lady is anxious to
"Yes; they were talking about it when we left Paris," said M. witness, the case would only be still more aggravated.
de Saint-Meran; "and where is it decided to transfer him?"
Suppose, for instance, the prisoner, as is more than probable,
21


CHAPTER 6


THE DEPUTY PROCUREUR DU ROI

to have served under Napoleon -- well, can you expect for an
instant, that one accustomed, at the word of his commander,
to rush fearlessly on the very bayonets of his foe, will scruple
more to drive a stiletto into the heart of one he knows to be
his personal enemy, than to slaughter his fellow-creatures,
merely because bidden to do so by one he is bound to obey?
Besides, one requires the excitement of being hateful in the
eyes of the accused, in order to lash one's self into a state of
sufficient vehemence and power. I would not choose to see
the man against whom I pleaded smile, as though in
mockery of my words. No; my pride is to see the accused
pale, agitated, and as though beaten out of all composure by
the fire of my eloquence." Renee uttered a smothered
exclamation.

this well-turned speech, Villefort looked carefully around to
mark the effect of his oratory, much as he would have done
had he been addressing the bench in open court.

"Oh, as for parricides, and such dreadful people as that,"
interposed Renee, "it matters very little what is done to them;
but as regards poor unfortunate creatures whose only crime
consists in having mixed themselves up in political
intrigues" --

"Is it possible the king could have condescended so far as to
express himself so favorably of me?" asked the enraptured
Villefort.

"Do you know, my dear Villefort," cried the Comte de
Salvieux, "that is exactly what I myself said the other day at
the Tuileries, when questioned by his majesty's principal
chamberlain touching the singularity of an alliance between
the son of a Girondin and the daughter of an officer of the
Duc de Conde; and I assure you he seemed fully to
comprehend that this mode of reconciling political
differences was based upon sound and excellent principles.
Then the king, who, without our suspecting it, had
overheard our conversation, interrupted us by saying,
`Villefort' -- observe that the king did not pronounce the
"Bravo!" cried one of the guests; "that is what I call talking to word Noirtier, but, on the contrary, placed considerable
some purpose."
emphasis on that of Villefort -- `Villefort,' said his majesty, `is
a young man of great judgment and discretion, who will be
"Just the person we require at a time like the present," said a
sure to make a figure in his profession; I like him much, and
second.
it gave me great pleasure to hear that he was about to
"What a splendid business that last case of yours was, my become the son-in-law of the Marquis and Marquise de
dear Villefort!" remarked a third; "I mean the trial of the man Saint-Meran. I should myself have recommended the match,
for murdering his father. Upon my word, you killed him ere had not the noble marquis anticipated my wishes by
the executioner had laid his hand upon him."
requesting my consent to it.'"

"Why, that is the very worst offence they could possibly
commit; for, don't you see, Renee, the king is the father of his
people, and he who shall plot or contrive aught against the
life and safety of the parent of thirty-two millions of souls, is
a parricide upon a fearfully great scale?"
"I don't know anything about that," replied Renee; "but, M.
de Villefort, you have promised me -- have you not? -always to show mercy to those I plead for."
"Make yourself quite easy on that point," answered Villefort,
with one of his sweetest smiles; "you and I will always
consult upon our verdicts."
"My love," said the marquise, "attend to your doves, your
lap-dogs, and embroidery, but do not meddle with what you
do not understand. Nowadays the military profession is in
abeyance and the magisterial robe is the badge of honor.
There is a wise Latin proverb that is very much in point."
"Cedant arma togae," said Villefort with a bow.
"I cannot speak Latin," responded the marquise.
"Well," said Renee, "I cannot help regretting you had not
chosen some other profession than your own -- a physician,
for instance. Do you know I always felt a shudder at the idea
of even a destroying angel?"

"I give you his very words; and if the marquis chooses to be
candid, he will confess that they perfectly agree with what
his majesty said to him, when he went six months ago to
consult him upon the subject of your espousing his
daughter."
"That is true," answered the marquis.
"How much do I owe this gracious prince! What is there I
would not do to evince my earnest gratitude!"
"That is right," cried the marquise. "I love to see you thus.
Now, then, were a conspirator to fall into your hands, he
would be most welcome."
"For my part, dear mother." interposed Renee, "I trust your
wishes will not prosper, and that Providence will only
permit petty offenders, poor debtors, and miserable cheats to
fall into M. de Villefort's hands, -- then I shall be contented."
"Just the same as though you prayed that a physician might
only be called upon to prescribe for headaches, measles, and
the stings of wasps, or any other slight affection of the
epidermis. If you wish to see me the king's attorney, you
must desire for me some of those violent and dangerous
diseases from the cure of which so much honor redounds to
the physician."

At this moment, and as though the utterance of Villefort's
wish had sufficed to effect its accomplishment, a servant
"Dear, good Renee," whispered Villefort, as he gazed with entered the room, and whispered a few words in his ear.
Villefort immediately rose from table and quitted the room
unutterable tenderness on the lovely speaker.
upon the plea of urgent business; he soon, however,
"Let us hope, my child," cried the marquis, "that M. de returned, his whole face beaming with delight. Renee
Villefort may prove the moral and political physician of this regarded him with fond affection; and certainly his
province; if so, he will have achieved a noble work."
handsome features, lit up as they then were with more than
"And one which will go far to efface the recollection of his usual fire and animation, seemed formed to excite the
innocent admiration with which she gazed on her graceful
father's conduct," added the incorrigible marquise.
and intelligent lover.
"Madame," replied Villefort, with a mournful smile, "I have
already had the honor to observe that my father has -- at "You were wishing just now," said Villefort, addressing her,
least, I hope so -- abjured his past errors, and that he is, at the "that I were a doctor instead of a lawyer. Well, I at least
present moment, a firm and zealous friend to religion and resemble the disciples of Esculapius in one thing -- that of
order -- a better royalist, possibly, than his son; for he has to not being able to call a day my own, not even that of my
atone for past dereliction, while I have no other impulse than betrothal."
warm, decided preference and conviction." Having made "And wherefore were you called away just now?" asked
22

Mademoiselle de Saint-Meran, with an air of deep interest.

protection of the headsman."

"For a very serious matter, which bids fair to make work for
the executioner."

"And where is the unfortunate being?" asked Renee.

"How dreadful!" exclaimed Renee, turning pale.
"Is it possible?" burst simultaneously from all who were near
enough to the magistrate to hear his words.
"Why, if my information prove correct, a sort of Bonaparte
conspiracy has just been discovered."
"Can I believe my ears?" cried the marquise.
"I will read you the letter containing the accusation, at least,"
said Villefort: -"`The king's attorney is informed by a friend to the throne
and the religions institutions of his country, that one named
Edmond Dantes, mate of the ship Pharaon, this day arrived
from Smyrna, after having touched at Naples and
Porto-Ferrajo, has been the bearer of a letter from Murat to
the usurper, and again taken charge of another letter from
the usurper to the Bonapartist club in Paris. Ample
corroboration of this statement may be obtained by arresting
the above-mentioned Edmond Dantes, who either carries the
letter for Paris about with him, or has it at his father's abode.
Should it not be found in the possession of father or son,
then it will assuredly be discovered in the cabin belonging to
the said Dantes on board the Pharaon.'"
"But," said Renee, "this letter, which, after all, is but an
anonymous scrawl, is not even addressed to you, but to the
king's attorney."
"True; but that gentleman being absent, his secretary, by his
orders, opened his letters; thinking this one of importance,
he sent for me, but not finding me, took upon himself to give
the necessary orders for arresting the accused party."

"He is at my house."
"Come, come, my friend," interrupted the marquise, "do not
neglect your duty to linger with us. You are the king's
servant, and must go wherever that service calls you."
"O Villefort!" cried Renee, clasping her hands, and looking
towards her lover with piteous earnestness, "be merciful on
this the day of our betrothal."
The young man passed round to the side of the table where
the fair pleader sat, and leaning over her chair said tenderly,
-"To give you pleasure, my sweet Renee, I promise to show
all the lenity in my power; but if the charges brought against
this Bonapartist hero prove correct, why, then, you really
must give me leave to order his head to be cut off." Renee
shuddered.
"Never mind that foolish girl, Villefort," said the marquise.
"She will soon get over these things." So saying, Madame de
Saint-Meran extended her dry bony hand to Villefort, who,
while imprinting a son-in-law's respectful salute on it,
looked at Renee, as much as to say, "I must try and fancy 'tis
your dear hand I kiss, as it should have been."
"These are mournful auspices to accompany a betrothal,"
sighed poor Renee.
"Upon my word, child!" exclaimed the angry marquise,
"your folly exceeds all bounds. I should be glad to know
what connection there can possibly be between your sickly
sentimentality and the affairs of the state!"
"O mother!" murmured Renee.

"Nay, madame, I pray you pardon this little traitor. I promise
you that to make up for her want of loyalty, I will be most
inflexibly severe;" then casting an expressive glance at his
"Nay, dear mother, say the accused person. You know we betrothed, which seemed to say, "Fear not, for your dear
cannot yet pronounce him guilty."
sake my justice shall be tempered with mercy," and receiving
a sweet and approving smile in return, Villefort quitted the
"He is in safe custody," answered Villefort; "and rely upon it,
room.
if the letter is found, he will not be likely to be trusted
abroad again, unless he goes forth under the especial
"Then the guilty person is absolutely in custody?" said the
marquise.

23


CHAPTER 7


Chapter 7

THE EXAMINATION

The Examination

N

o sooner had Villefort left the salon, than he assumed
the grave air of a man who holds the balance of life and
death in his hands. Now, in spite of the mobility of his
countenance, the command of which, like a finished actor, he
had carefully studied before the glass, it was by no means
easy for him to assume an air of judicial severity. Except the
recollection of the line of politics his father had adopted, and
which might interfere, unless he acted with the greatest
prudence, with his own career, Gerard de Villefort was as
happy as a man could be. Already rich, he held a high
official situation, though only twenty-seven. He was about to
marry a young and charming woman, whom he loved, not
passionately, but reasonably, as became a deputy attorney of
the king; and besides her personal attractions, which were
very great, Mademoiselle de Saint-Meran's family possessed
considerable political influence, which they would, of course,
exert in his favor. The dowry of his wife amounted to fifty
thousand crowns, and he had, besides, the prospect of seeing
her fortune increased to half a million at her father's death.
These considerations naturally gave Villefort a feeling of
such complete felicity that his mind was fairly dazzled in its
contemplation.

"You are aware, monsieur, that a man may be estimable and
trustworthy in private life, and the best seaman in the
merchant service, and yet be, politically speaking, a great
criminal. Is it not true?"

"We know nothing as yet of the conspiracy, monsieur; all the
papers found have been sealed up and placed on your desk.
The prisoner himself is named Edmond Dantes, mate on
board the three-master the Pharaon, trading in cotton with
Alexandria and Smyrna, and belonging to Morrel & Son, of
Marseilles."

full of police agents and gendarmes, in the midst of whom,
carefully watched, but calm and smiling, stood the prisoner.
Villefort traversed the ante-chamber, cast a side glance at
Dantes, and taking a packet which a gendarme offered him,
disappeared, saying, "Bring in the prisoner."

The magistrate laid emphasis on these words, as if he wished
to apply them to the owner himself, while his eyes seemed to
plunge into the heart of one who, interceding for another,
had himself need of indulgence. Morrel reddened, for his
own conscience was not quite clear on politics; besides, what
Dantes had told him of his interview with the grand-marshal,
and what the emperor had said to him, embarrassed him. He
replied, however, -"I entreat you, M. de Villefort, be, as you always are, kind
and equitable, and give him back to us soon." This give us
sounded revolutionary in the deputy's ears.

"Ah, ah," murmured he, "is Dantes then a member of some
Carbonari society, that his protector thus employs the
collective form? He was, if I recollect, arrested in a tavern, in
company with a great many others." Then he added,
"Monsieur, you may rest assured I shall perform my duty
impartially, and that if he be innocent you shall not have
At the door he met the commissary of police, who was appealed to me in vain; should he, however, be guilty, in this
waiting for him. The sight of this officer recalled Villefort present epoch, impunity would furnish a dangerous
from the third heaven to earth; he composed his face, as we example, and I must do my duty."
have before described, and said, "I have read the letter, sir, As he had now arrived at the door of his own house, which
and you have acted rightly in arresting this man; now inform adjoined the Palais de Justice, he entered, after having,
me what you have discovered concerning him and the coldly saluted the shipowner, who stood, as if petrified, on
conspiracy."
the spot where Villefort had left him. The ante-chamber was

"Before he entered the merchant service, had he ever served
in the marines?"
"Oh, no, monsieur, he is very young."
"How old?"
"Nineteen or twenty at the most."
At this moment, and as Villefort had arrived at the corner of
the Rue des Conseils, a man, who seemed to have been
waiting for him, approached; it was M. Morrel.
"Ah, M. de Villefort," cried he, "I am delighted to see you.
Some of your people have committed the strangest mistake
-- they have just arrested Edmond Dantes, mate of my
vessel."
"I know it, monsieur," replied Villefort, "and I am now going
to examine him."
"Oh," said Morrel, carried away by his friendship, "you do
not know him, and I do. He is the most estimable, the most
trustworthy creature in the world, and I will venture to say,
there is not a better seaman in all the merchant service. Oh,
M. de Villefort, I beseech your indulgence for him."

Rapid as had been Villefort's glance, it had served to give
him an idea of the man he was about to interrogate. He had
recognized intelligence in the high forehead, courage in the
dark eye and bent brow, and frankness in the thick lips that
showed a set of pearly teeth. Villefort's first impression was
favorable; but he had been so often warned to mistrust first
impulses, that he applied the maxim to the impression,
forgetting the difference between the two words. He stifled,
therefore, the feelings of compassion that were rising,
composed his features, and sat down, grim and sombre, at
his desk. An instant after Dantes entered. He was pale, but
calm and collected, and saluting his judge with easy
politeness, looked round for a seat, as if he had been in M.
Morrel's salon. It was then that he encountered for the first
time Villefort's look, -- that look peculiar to the magistrate,
who, while seeming to read the thoughts of others, betrays
nothing of his own.
"Who and what are you?" demanded Villefort, turning over
a pile of papers, containing information relative to the
prisoner, that a police agent had given to him on his entry,
and that, already, in an hour's time, had swelled to
voluminous proportions, thanks to the corrupt espionage of
which "the accused" is always made the victim.

Villefort, as we have seen, belonged to the aristocratic party "My name is Edmond Dantes," replied the young man
at Marseilles, Morrel to the plebeian; the first was a royalist, calmly; "I am mate of the Pharaon, belonging to Messrs.
the other suspected of Bonapartism. Villefort looked Morrel & Son."
disdainfully at Morrel, and replied, -"Your age?" continued Villefort.
24

"Nineteen," returned Dantes.
"What were you doing at the moment you were arrested?"

sufficiently elevated for that. As for my disposition, that is,
perhaps, somewhat too hasty; but I have striven to repress it.
I have had ten or twelve sailors under me, and if you
question them, they will tell you that they love and respect
me, not as a father, for I am too young, but as an elder
brother."

"I was at the festival of my marriage, monsieur," said the
young man, his voice slightly tremulous, so great was the
contrast between that happy moment and the painful
ceremony he was now undergoing; so great was the contrast
"But you may have excited jealousy. You are about to
between the sombre aspect of M. de Villefort and the radiant
become captain at nineteen -- an elevated post; you are about
face of Mercedes.
to marry a pretty girl, who loves you; and these two pieces
"You were at the festival of your marriage?" said the deputy, of good fortune may have excited the envy of some one."
shuddering in spite of himself.
"You are right; you know men better than I do, and what
"Yes, monsieur; I am on the point of marrying a young girl I you say may possibly be the case, I confess; but if such
have been attached to for three years." Villefort, impassive as persons are among my acquaintances I prefer not to know it,
he was, was struck with this coincidence; and the tremulous because then I should be forced to hate them."
voice of Dantes, surprised in the midst of his happiness,
"You are wrong; you should always strive to see clearly
struck a sympathetic chord in his own bosom -- he also was
around you. You seem a worthy young man; I will depart
on the point of being married, and he was summoned from
from the strict line of my duty to aid you in discovering the
his own happiness to destroy that of another. "This
author of this accusation. Here is the paper; do you know the
philosophic reflection," thought he, "will make a great
writing?" As he spoke, Villefort drew the letter from his
sensation at M. de Saint-Meran's;" and he arranged mentally,
pocket, and presented it to Dantes. Dantes read it. A cloud
while Dantes awaited further questions, the antithesis by
passed over his brow as he said, -which orators often create a reputation for eloquence. When
this speech was arranged, Villefort turned to Dantes.
"No, monsieur, I do not know the writing, and yet it is
tolerably plain. Whoever did it writes well. I am very
"Go on, sir," said he.
fortunate," added he, looking gratefully at Villefort, "to be
"What would you have me say?"
examined by such a man as you; for this envious person is a
real enemy." And by the rapid glance that the young man's
"Give all the information in your power."
eyes shot forth, Villefort saw how much energy lay hid
"Tell me on which point you desire information, and I will beneath this mildness.
tell all I know; only," added he, with a smile, "I warn you I
"Now," said the deputy, "answer me frankly, not as a
know very little."
prisoner to a judge, but as one man to another who takes an
"Have you served under the usurper?"
interest in him, what truth is there in the accusation
"I was about to be mustered into the Royal Marines when he contained in this anonymous letter?" And Villefort threw
disdainfully on his desk the letter Dantes had just given back
fell."
to him.
"It is reported your political opinions are extreme," said
Villefort, who had never heard anything of the kind, but was "None at all. I will tell you the real facts. I swear by my
honor as a sailor, by my love for Mercedes, by the life of my
not sorry to make this inquiry, as if it were an accusation.
father" -"My political opinions!" replied Dantes. "Alas, sir, I never
had any opinions. I am hardly nineteen; I know nothing; I "Speak, monsieur," said Villefort. Then, internally, "If Renee
have no part to play. If I obtain the situation I desire, I shall could see me, I hope she would be satisfied, and would no
owe it to M. Morrel. Thus all my opinions -- I will not say longer call me a decapitator."
public, but private -- are confined to these three sentiment, -- "Well, when we quitted Naples, Captain Leclere was
I love my father, I respect M. Morrel, and I adore Mercedes. attacked with a brain fever. As we had no doctor on board,
This, sir, is all I can tell you, and you see how uninteresting it and he was so anxious to arrive at Elba, that he would not
is." As Dantes spoke, Villefort gazed at his ingenuous and touch at any other port, his disorder rose to such a height,
open countenance, and recollected the words of Renee, who, that at the end of the third day, feeling he was dying, he
without knowing who the culprit was, had besought his called me to him. `My dear Dantes,' said he, `swear to
indulgence for him. With the deputy's knowledge of crime perform what I am going to tell you, for it is a matter of the
and criminals, every word the young man uttered convinced deepest importance.'
him more and more of his innocence. This lad, for he was
scarcely a man, -- simple, natural, eloquent with that "`I swear, captain,' replied I.
eloquence of the heart never found when sought for; full of "`Well, as after my death the command devolves on you as
affection for everybody, because he was happy, and because mate, assume the command, and bear up for the Island of
happiness renders even the wicked good -- extended his Elba, disembark at Porto-Ferrajo, ask for the grand-marshal,
affection even to his judge, spite of Villefort's severe look give him this letter -- perhaps they will give you another
and stern accent. Dantes seemed full of kindness.
letter, and charge you with a commission. You will
"Pardieu," said Villefort, "he is a noble fellow. I hope I shall accomplish what I was to have done, and derive all the
gain Renee's favor easily by obeying the first command she honor and profit from it.'
ever imposed on me. I shall have at least a pressure of the
hand in public, and a sweet kiss in private." Full of this idea,
Villefort's face became so joyous, that when he turned to
Dantes, the latter, who had watched the change on his
physiognomy, was smiling also.
"Sir," said Villefort, "have you any enemies, at least, that you
know."
"I have enemies?" replied Dantes; "my position is not

"`I will do it, captain; but perhaps I shall not be admitted to
the grand marshal's presence as easily as you expect?'
"`Here is a ring that will obtain audience of him, and remove
every difficulty,' said the captain. At these words he gave me
a ring. It was time -- two hours after he was delirious; the
next day he died."
"And what did you do then?"
"What I ought to have done, and what every one would
25


CHAPTER 7


THE EXAMINATION

have done in my place. Everywhere the last requests of a
dying man are sacred; but with a sailor the last requests of
his superior are commands. I sailed for the Island of Elba,
where I arrived the next day; I ordered everybody to remain
on board, and went on shore alone. As I had expected, I
found some difficulty in obtaining access to the
grand-marshal; but I sent the ring I had received from the
captain to him, and was instantly admitted. He questioned
me concerning Captain Leclere's death; and, as the latter had
told me, gave me a letter to carry on to a person in Paris. I
undertook it because it was what my captain had bade me
do. I landed here, regulated the affairs of the vessel, and
hastened to visit my affianced bride, whom I found more
lovely than ever. Thanks to M. Morrel, all the forms were got
over; in a word I was, as I told you, at my marriage-feast;
and I should have been married in an hour, and to-morrow I
intended to start for Paris, had I not been arrested on this
charge which you as well as I now see to be unjust."

"And you say that you are ignorant of the contents of this
letter?"
"I give you my word of honor, sir," said Dantes; "but what is
the matter? You are ill -- shall I ring for assistance? -- shall I
call?"
"No," said Villefort, rising hastily; "stay where you are. It is
for me to give orders here, and not you."
"Monsieur," replied Dantes proudly, "it was only to summon
assistance for you."
"I want none; it was a temporary indisposition. Attend to
yourself; answer me." Dantes waited, expecting a question,
but in vain. Villefort fell back on his chair, passed his hand
over his brow, moist with perspiration, and, for the third
time, read the letter.

"Oh, if he knows the contents of this!" murmured he, "and
that Noirtier is the father of Villefort, I am lost!" And he fixed
"Ah," said Villefort, "this seems to me the truth. If you have his eyes upon Edmond as if he would have penetrated his
been culpable, it was imprudence, and this imprudence was thoughts.
in obedience to the orders of your captain. Give up this letter "Oh, it is impossible to doubt it," cried he, suddenly.
you have brought from Elba, and pass your word you will
"In heaven's name!" cried the unhappy young man, "if you
appear should you be required, and go and rejoin your
doubt me, question me; I will answer you." Villefort made a
friends.
violent effort, and in a tone he strove to render firm, -"I am free, then, sir?" cried Dantes joyfully.
"Sir," said he, "I am no longer able, as I had hoped, to restore
"Yes; but first give me this letter."
you immediately to liberty; before doing so, I must consult
"You have it already, for it was taken from me with some the trial justice; what my own feeling is you already know."
others which I see in that packet."

"Oh, monsieur," cried Dantes, "you have been rather a friend
"Stop a moment," said the deputy, as Dantes took his hat and than a judge."
gloves. "To whom is it addressed?"
"Well, I must detain you some time longer, but I will strive to
"To Monsieur Noirtier, Rue Coq-Heron, Paris." Had a make it as short as possible. The principal charge against you
thunderbolt fallen into the room, Villefort could not have is this letter, and you see" -- Villefort approached the fire,
been more stupefied. He sank into his seat, and hastily cast it in, and waited until it was entirely consumed.
turning over the packet, drew forth the fatal letter, at which
he glanced with an expression of terror.
"M. Noirtier, Rue Coq-Heron, No. 13," murmured he,
growing still paler.
"Yes," said Dantes; "do you know him?"
"No," replied Villefort; "a faithful servant of the king does
not know conspirators."
"It is a conspiracy, then?" asked Dantes, who after believing
himself free, now began to feel a tenfold alarm. "I have,
however, already told you, sir, I was entirely ignorant of the
contents of the letter."

"You see, I destroy it?"
"Oh," exclaimed Dantes, "you are goodness itself."
"Listen," continued Villefort; "you can now have confidence
in me after what I have done."
"Oh, command, and I will obey."
"Listen; this is not a command, but advice I give you."
"Speak, and I will follow your advice."
"I shall detain you until this evening in the Palais de Justice.
Should any one else interrogate you, say to him what you
have said to me, but do not breathe a word of this letter."

"Yes; but you knew the name of the person to whom it was
addressed," said Villefort.

"I promise." It was Villefort who seemed to entreat, and the
prisoner who reassured him.

"I was forced to read the address to know to whom to give
it."

"You see," continued he, glancing toward the grate, where
fragments of burnt paper fluttered in the flames, "the letter is
destroyed; you and I alone know of its existence; should you,
therefore, be questioned, deny all knowledge of it -- deny it
boldly, and you are saved."

"Have you shown this letter to any one?" asked Villefort,
becoming still more pale.
"To no one, on my honor."
"Everybody is ignorant that you are the bearer of a letter
from the Island of Elba, and addressed to M. Noirtier?"
"Everybody, except the person who gave it to me."
"And that was too much, far too much," murmured Villefort.
Villefort's brow darkened more and more, his white lips and
clinched teeth filled Dantes with apprehension. After
reading the letter, Villefort covered his face with his hands.

"Be satisfied; I will deny it."
"It was the only letter you had?"
"It was."
"Swear it."
"I swear it."
Villefort rang. A police agent entered. Villefort whispered
some words in his ear, to which the officer replied by a
motion of his head.

"Oh," said Dantes timidly, "what is the matter?" Villefort
made no answer, but raised his head at the expiration of a "Follow him," said Villefort to Dantes. Dantes saluted
few seconds, and again perused the letter.
Villefort and retired. Hardly had the door closed when
Villefort threw himself half-fainting into a chair.
26

"Alas, alas," murmured he, "if the procureur himself had
been at Marseilles I should have been ruined. This accursed
letter would have destroyed all my hopes. Oh, my father,
must your past career always interfere with my successes?"
Suddenly a light passed over his face, a smile played round
his set mouth, and his haggard eyes were fixed in thought.

"This will do," said he, "and from this letter, which might
have ruined me, I will make my fortune. Now to the work I
have in hand." And after having assured himself that the
prisoner was gone, the deputy procureur hastened to the
house of his betrothed.

27


CHAPTER 8


Chapter 8

THE CHATEAU D'IF

The Chateau D'if

T

he commissary of police, as he traversed the
ante-chamber, made a sign to two gendarmes, who
placed themselves one on Dantes' right and the other on his
left. A door that communicated with the Palais de Justice
was opened, and they went through a long range of gloomy
corridors, whose appearance might have made even the
boldest shudder. The Palais de Justice communicated with
the prison, -- a sombre edifice, that from its grated windows
looks on the clock-tower of the Accoules. After numberless
windings, Dantes saw a door with an iron wicket. The
commissary took up an iron mallet and knocked thrice,
every blow seeming to Dantes as if struck on his heart. The
door opened, the two gendarmes gently pushed him
forward, and the door closed with a loud sound behind him.
The air he inhaled was no longer pure, but thick and
mephitic, -- he was in prison. He was conducted to a
tolerably neat chamber, but grated and barred, and its
appearance, therefore, did not greatly alarm him; besides,
the words of Villefort, who seemed to interest himself so
much, resounded still in his ears like a promise of freedom.
It was four o'clock when Dantes was placed in this chamber.
It was, as we have said, the 1st of March, and the prisoner
was soon buried in darkness. The obscurity augmented the
acuteness of his hearing; at the slightest sound he rose and
hastened to the door, convinced they were about to liberate
him, but the sound died away, and Dantes sank again into
his seat. At last, about ten o'clock, and just as Dantes began
to despair, steps were heard in the corridor, a key turned in
the lock, the bolts creaked, the massy oaken door flew open,
and a flood of light from two torches pervaded the
apartment. By the torchlight Dantes saw the glittering sabres
and carbines of four gendarmes. He had advanced at first,
but stopped at the sight of this display of force.
"Are you come to fetch me?" asked he.
"Yes," replied a gendarme.
"By the orders of the deputy procureur?"
"I believe so." The conviction that they came from M. de
Villefort relieved all Dantes' apprehensions; he advanced
calmly, and placed himself in the centre of the escort. A
carriage waited at the door, the coachman was on the box,
and a police officer sat beside him.
"Is this carriage for me?" said Dantes.
"It is for you," replied a gendarme.

"Can all this force be summoned on my account?" thought
he.
The officer opened the door, which was locked, and, without
speaking a word, answered Dantes' question; for he saw
between the ranks of the soldiers a passage formed from the
carriage to the port. The two gendarmes who were opposite
to him descended first, then he was ordered to alight and the
gendarmes on each side of him followed his example. They
advanced towards a boat, which a custom-house officer held
by a chain, near the quay.
The soldiers looked at Dantes with an air of stupid curiosity.
In an instant he was placed in the stern-sheets of the boat,
between the gendarmes, while the officer stationed himself
at the bow; a shove sent the boat adrift, and four sturdy
oarsmen impelled it rapidly towards the Pilon. At a shout
from the boat, the chain that closes the mouth of the port
was lowered and in a second they were, as Dantes knew, in
the Frioul and outside the inner harbor.
The prisoner's first feeling was of joy at again breathing the
pure air -- for air is freedom; but he soon sighed, for he
passed before La Reserve, where he had that morning been
so happy, and now through the open windows came the
laughter and revelry of a ball. Dantes folded his hands,
raised his eyes to heaven, and prayed fervently.
The boat continued her voyage. They had passed the Tete de
Morte, were now off the Anse du Pharo, and about to double
the battery. This manoeuvre was incomprehensible to
Dantes.
"Whither are you taking me?" asked he.
"You will soon know."
"But still" -"We are forbidden to give you any explanation." Dantes,
trained in discipline, knew that nothing would be more
absurd than to question subordinates, who were forbidden
to reply; and so he remained silent.
The most vague and wild thoughts passed through his mind.
The boat they were in could not make a long voyage; there
was no vessel at anchor outside the harbor; he thought,
perhaps, they were going to leave him on some distant point.
He was not bound, nor had they made any attempt to
handcuff him; this seemed a good augury. Besides, had not
the deputy, who had been so kind to him, told him that
provided he did not pronounce the dreaded name of
Noirtier, he had nothing to apprehend? Had not Villefort in
his presence destroyed the fatal letter, the only proof against
him?

Dantes was about to speak; but feeling himself urged
forward, and having neither the power nor the intention to
resist, he mounted the steps, and was in an instant seated
inside between two gendarmes; the two others took their
places opposite, and the carriage rolled heavily over the He waited silently, striving to pierce through the darkness.
stones.
They had left the Ile Ratonneau, where the lighthouse stood,
The prisoner glanced at the windows -- they were grated; he on the right, and were now opposite the Point des Catalans.
had changed his prison for another that was conveying him It seemed to the prisoner that he could distinguish a
he knew not whither. Through the grating, however, Dantes feminine form on the beach, for it was there Mercedes dwelt.
saw they were passing through the Rue Caisserie, and by the How was it that a presentiment did not warn Mercedes that
Rue Saint-Laurent and the Rue Taramis, to the port. Soon he her lover was within three hundred yards of her?
saw the lights of La Consigne.
One light alone was visible; and Dantes saw that it came
The carriage stopped, the officer descended, approached the from Mercedes' chamber. Mercedes was the only one awake
guardhouse, a dozen soldiers came out and formed in the whole settlement. A loud cry could be heard by her.
themselves in order; Dantes saw the reflection of their But pride restrained him and he did not utter it. What would
muskets by the light of the lamps on the quay.
his guards think if they heard him shout like a madman?
28

He remained silent, his eyes fixed upon the light; the boat
went on, but the prisoner thought only of Mercedes. An
intervening elevation of land hid the light. Dantes turned
and perceived that they had got out to sea. While he had
been absorbed in thought, they had shipped their oars and
hoisted sail; the boat was now moving with the wind.
In spite of his repugnance to address the guards, Dantes
turned to the nearest gendarme, and taking his hand, -"Comrade," said he, "I adjure you, as a Christian and a
soldier, to tell me where we are going. I am Captain Dantes,
a loyal Frenchman, thought accused of treason; tell me
where you are conducting me, and I promise you on my
honor I will submit to my fate."
The gendarme looked irresolutely at his companion, who
returned for answer a sign that said, "I see no great harm in
telling him now," and the gendarme replied, -"You are a native of Marseilles, and a sailor, and yet you do
not know where you are going?"
"On my honor, I have no idea."
"Have you no idea whatever?"
"None at all."
"That is impossible."
"I swear to you it is true. Tell me, I entreat."
"But my orders."
"Your orders do not forbid your telling me what I must
know in ten minutes, in half an hour, or an hour. You see I
cannot escape, even if I intended."

quitted the bottom of the boat. He fell back cursing with
rage.
"Good!" said the gendarme, placing his knee on his chest;
"believe soft-spoken gentlemen again! Harkye, my friend, I
have disobeyed my first order, but I will not disobey the
second; and if you move, I will blow your brains out." And
he levelled his carbine at Dantes, who felt the muzzle against
his temple.
For a moment the idea of struggling crossed his mind, and of
so ending the unexpected evil that had overtaken him. But
he bethought him of M. de Villefort's promise; and, besides,
death in a boat from the hand of a gendarme seemed too
terrible. He remained motionless, but gnashing his teeth and
wringing his hands with fury.
At this moment the boat came to a landing with a violent
shock. One of the sailors leaped on shore, a cord creaked as it
ran through a pulley, and Dantes guessed they were at the
end of the voyage, and that they were mooring the boat.
His guards, taking him by the arms and coat-collar, forced
him to rise, and dragged him towards the steps that lead to
the gate of the fortress, while the police officer carrying a
musket with fixed bayonet followed behind.
Dantes made no resistance; he was like a man in a dream: he
saw soldiers drawn up on the embankment; he knew
vaguely that he was ascending a flight of steps; he was
conscious that he passed through a door, and that the door
closed behind him; but all this indistinctly as through a mist.
He did not even see the ocean, that terrible barrier against
freedom, which the prisoners look upon with utter despair.

They halted for a minute, during which he strove to collect
"Unless you are blind, or have never been outside the harbor,
his thoughts. He looked around; he was in a court
you must know."
surrounded by high walls; he heard the measured tread of
"I do not."
sentinels, and as they passed before the light he saw the
"Look round you then." Dantes rose and looked forward, barrels of their muskets shine.
when he saw rise within a hundred yards of him the black
and frowning rock on which stands the Chateau d'If. This
gloomy fortress, which has for more than three hundred
years furnished food for so many wild legends, seemed to
Dantes like a scaffold to a malefactor.
"The Chateau d'If?" cried he, "what are we going there for?"
The gendarme smiled.
"I am not going there to be imprisoned," said Dantes; "it is
only used for political prisoners. I have committed no crime.
Are there any magistrates or judges at the Chateau d'If?"
"There are only," said the gendarme, "a governor, a garrison,
turnkeys, and good thick walls. Come, come, do not look so
astonished, or you will make me think you are laughing at
me in return for my good nature." Dantes pressed the
gendarme's hand as though he would crush it.
"You think, then," said he, "that I am taken to the Chateau
d'If to be imprisoned there?"
"It is probable; but there is no occasion to squeeze so hard."
"Without any inquiry, without any formality?"
"All the formalities have been gone through; the inquiry is
already made."
"And so, in spite of M. de Villefort's promises?"

They waited upwards of ten minutes. Certain Dantes could
not escape, the gendarmes released him. They seemed
awaiting orders. The orders came.
"Where is the prisoner?" said a voice.
"Here," replied the gendarmes.
"Let him follow me; I will take him to his cell."
"Go!" said the gendarmes, thrusting Dantes forward.
The prisoner followed his guide, who led him into a room
almost under ground, whose bare and reeking walls seemed
as though impregnated with tears; a lamp placed on a stool
illumined the apartment faintly, and showed Dantes the
features of his conductor, an under-jailer, ill-clothed, and of
sullen appearance.
"Here is your chamber for to-night," said he. "It is late, and
the governor is asleep. To-morrow, perhaps, he may change
you. In the meantime there is bread, water, and fresh straw;
and that is all a prisoner can wish for. Goodnight." And
before Dantes could open his mouth -- before he had noticed
where the jailer placed his bread or the water -- before he
had glanced towards the corner where the straw was, the
jailer disappeared, taking with him the lamp and closing the
door, leaving stamped upon the prisoner's mind the dim
reflection of the dripping walls of his dungeon.

"I do not know what M. de Villefort promised you," said the Dantes was alone in darkness and in silence -- cold as the
gendarme, "but I know we are taking you to the Chateau d'If. shadows that he felt breathe on his burning forehead. With
But what are you doing? Help, comrades, help!"
the first dawn of day the jailer returned, with orders to leave
By a rapid movement, which the gendarme's practiced eye Dantes where he was. He found the prisoner in the same
had perceived, Dantes sprang forward to precipitate himself position, as if fixed there, his eyes swollen with weeping. He
into the sea; but four vigorous arms seized him as his feet had passed the night standing, and without sleep. The jailer
advanced; Dantes appeared not to perceive him. He
29


CHAPTER 8


THE CHATEAU D'IF

touched him on the shoulder. Edmond started.
"Have you not slept?" said the jailer.
"I do not know," replied Dantes. The jailer stared.
"Are you hungry?" continued he.
"I do not know."
"Do you wish for anything?"
"I wish to see the governor." The jailer shrugged his
shoulders and left the chamber.
Dantes followed him with his eyes, and stretched forth his
hands towards the open door; but the door closed. All his
emotion then burst forth; he cast himself on the ground,
weeping bitterly, and asking himself what crime he had
committed that he was thus punished.
The day passed thus; he scarcely tasted food, but walked
round and round the cell like a wild beast in its cage. One
thought in particular tormented him: namely, that during his
journey hither he had sat so still, whereas he might, a dozen
times, have plunged into the sea, and, thanks to his powers
of swimming, for which he was famous, have gained the
shore, concealed himself until the arrival of a Genoese or
Spanish vessel, escaped to Spain or Italy, where Mercedes
and his father could have joined him. He had no fears as to
how he should live -- good seamen are welcome everywhere.
He spoke Italian like a Tuscan, and Spanish like a Castilian;
he would have been free, and happy with Mercedes and his
father, whereas he was now confined in the Chateau d'If,
that impregnable fortress, ignorant of the future destiny of
his father and Mercedes; and all this because he had trusted
to Villefort's promise. The thought was maddening, and
Dantes threw himself furiously down on his straw. The next
morning at the same hour, the jailer came again.
"Well," said the jailer, "are you more reasonable to-day?"
Dantes made no reply.
"Come, cheer up; is there anything that I can do for you?"
"I wish to see the governor."
"I have already told you it was impossible."
"Why so?"

behaved you will be allowed to walk about, and some day
you will meet the governor, and if he chooses to reply, that is
his affair."
"But," asked Dantes, "how long shall I have to wait?"
"Ah, a month -- six months -- a year."
"It is too long a time. I wish to see him at once."
"Ah," said the jailer, "do not always brood over what is
impossible, or you will be mad in a fortnight."
"You think so?"
"Yes; we have an instance here; it was by always offering a
million of francs to the governor for his liberty that an abbe
became mad, who was in this chamber before you."
"How long has he left it?"
"Two years."
"Was he liberated, then?"
"No; he was put in a dungeon."
"Listen!" said Dantes. "I am not an abbe, I am not mad;
perhaps I shall be, but at present, unfortunately, I am not. I
will make you another offer."
"What is that?"
"I do not offer you a million, because I have it not; but I will
give you a hundred crowns if, the first time you go to
Marseilles, you will seek out a young girl named Mercedes,
at the Catalans, and give her two lines from me."
"If I took them, and were detected, I should lose my place,
which is worth two thousand francs a year; so that I should
be a great fool to run such a risk for three hundred."
"Well," said Dantes, "mark this; if you refuse at least to tell
Mercedes I am here, I will some day hide myself behind the
door, and when you enter I will dash out your brains with
this stool."
"Threats!" cried the jailer, retreating and putting himself on
the defensive; "you are certainly going mad. The abbe began
like you, and in three days you will be like him, mad enough
to tie up; but, fortunately, there are dungeons here." Dantes
whirled the stool round his head.

"Because it is against prison rules, and prisoners must not "All right, all right," said the jailer; "all right, since you will
even ask for it."
have it so. I will send word to the governor."
"What is allowed, then?"
"Very well," returned Dantes, dropping the stool and sitting
"Better fare, if you pay for it, books, and leave to walk
about."

on it as if he were in reality mad. The jailer went out, and
returned in an instant with a corporal and four soldiers.

"I do not want books, I am satisfied with my food, and do "By the governor's orders," said he, "conduct the prisoner to
the tier beneath."
not care to walk about; but I wish to see the governor."
"If you worry me by repeating the same thing, I will not
bring you any more to eat."

"To the dungeon, then," said the corporal.

"Yes; we must put the madman with the madmen." The
"Well, then," said Edmond, "if you do not, I shall die of soldiers seized Dantes, who followed passively.
hunger -- that is all."
He descended fifteen steps, and the door of a dungeon was
The jailer saw by his tone he would be happy to die; and as opened, and he was thrust in. The door closed, and Dantes
every prisoner is worth ten sous a day to his jailer, he replied advanced with outstretched hands until he touched the wall;
he then sat down in the corner until his eyes became
in a more subdued tone.
accustomed to the darkness. The jailer was right; Dantes
"What you ask is impossible; but if you are very well
wanted but little of being utterly mad.

30


Chapter 9

The Evening Of The Betrothal

V

illefort had, as we have said, hastened back to Madame
de Saint-Meran's in the Place du Grand Cours, and on
entering the house found that the guests whom he had left at
table were taking coffee in the salon. Renee was, with all the
rest of the company, anxiously awaiting him, and his
entrance was followed by a general exclamation.
"Well, Decapitator, Guardian of the State, Royalist, Brutus,
what is the matter?" said one. "Speak out."
"Are we threatened with a fresh Reign of Terror?" asked
another.
"Has the Corsican ogre broken loose?" cried a third.
"Marquise," said Villefort, approaching his future
mother-in-law, "I request your pardon for thus leaving you.
Will the marquis honor me by a few moments' private
conversation?"
"Ah, it is really a serious matter, then?" asked the marquis,
remarking the cloud on Villefort's brow.

"To the king?"
"Yes."
"I dare not write to his majesty."
"I do not ask you to write to his majesty, but ask M. de
Salvieux to do so. I want a letter that will enable me to reach
the king's presence without all the formalities of demanding
an audience; that would occasion a loss of precious time."
"But address yourself to the keeper of the seals; he has the
right of entry at the Tuileries, and can procure you audience
at any hour of the day or night."
"Doubtless; but there is no occasion to divide the honors of
my discovery with him. The keeper would leave me in the
background, and take all the glory to himself. I tell you,
marquis, my fortune is made if I only reach the Tuileries the
first, for the king will not forget the service I do him."
"In that case go and get ready. I will call Salvieux and make
him write the letter."

"So serious that I must take leave of you for a few days; so,"
"Be as quick as possible, I must be on the road in a quarter of
added he, turning to Renee, "judge for yourself if it be not
an hour."
important."
"Tell your coachman to stop at the door."
"You are going to leave us?" cried Renee, unable to hide her
"You will present my excuses to the marquise and
emotion at this unexpected announcement.
Mademoiselle Renee, whom I leave on such a day with great
"Alas," returned Villefort, "I must!"
regret."
"Where, then, are you going?" asked the marquise.
"You will find them both here, and can make your farewells
"That, madame, is an official secret; but if you have any in person."
commissions for Paris, a friend of mine is going there
"A thousand thanks -- and now for the letter."
to-night, and will with pleasure undertake them." The guests
The marquis rang, a servant entered.
looked at each other.
"You wish to speak to me alone?" said the marquis.

"Say to the Comte de Salvieux that I would like to see him."

"Yes, let us go to the library, please." The marquis took his
arm, and they left the salon.

"Now, then, go," said the marquis.

"Well," asked he, as soon as they were by themselves, "tell
me what it is?"

Villefort hastily quitted the apartment, but reflecting that the
sight of the deputy procureur running through the streets
would be enough to throw the whole city into confusion, he
resumed his ordinary pace. At his door he perceived a figure
in the shadow that seemed to wait for him. It was Mercedes,
who, hearing no news of her lover, had come unobserved to
inquire after him.

"An affair of the greatest importance, that demands my
immediate presence in Paris. Now, excuse the indiscretion,
marquis, but have you any landed property?"
"All my fortune is in the funds; seven or eight hundred
thousand francs."
"Then sell out -- sell out, marquis, or you will lose it all."
"But how can I sell out here?"
"You have it broker, have you not?"
"Yes."

"I shall be gone only a few moments."

As Villefort drew near, she advanced and stood before him.
Dantes had spoken of Mercedes, and Villefort instantly
recognized her. Her beauty and high bearing surprised him,
and when she inquired what had become of her lover, it
seemed to him that she was the judge, and he the accused.

"The young man you speak of," said Villefort abruptly, "is a
"Then give me a letter to him, and tell him to sell out without great criminal. and I can do nothing for him, mademoiselle."
an instant's delay, perhaps even now I shall arrive too late."
Mercedes burst into tears, and, as Villefort strove to pass her,
"The deuce you say!" replied the marquis, "let us lose no time, again addressed him.
then!"
And, sitting down, he wrote a letter to his broker, ordering
him to sell out at the market price.
"Now, then," said Villefort, placing the letter in his
pocketbook, "I must have another!"
"To whom?"
"To the king."

"But, at least, tell me where he is, that I may know whether
he is alive or dead," said she.
"I do not know; he is no longer in my hands," replied
Villefort.
And desirous of putting an end to the interview, he pushed
by her, and closed the door, as if to exclude the pain he felt.
But remorse is not thus banished; like Virgil's wounded hero,
he carried the arrow in his wound, and, arrived at the salon,
31


CHAPTER 9


THE EVENING OF THE BETROTHAL

Villefort uttered a sigh that was almost a sob, and sank into a
chair.
Then the first pangs of an unending torture seized upon his
heart. The man he sacrificed to his ambition, that innocent
victim immolated on the altar of his father's faults, appeared
to him pale and threatening, leading his affianced bride by
the hand, and bringing with him remorse, not such as the
ancients figured, furious and terrible, but that slow and
consuming agony whose pangs are intensified from hour to
hour up to the very moment of death. Then he had a
moment's hesitation. He had frequently called for capital
punishment on criminals, and owing to his irresistible
eloquence they had been condemned, and yet the slightest
shadow of remorse had never clouded Villefort's brow,
because they were guilty; at least, he believed so; but here
was an innocent man whose happiness he had destroyed: in
this case he was not the judge, but the executioner.
As he thus reflected, he felt the sensation we have described,
and which had hitherto been unknown to him, arise in his
bosom, and fill him with vague apprehensions. It is thus that
a wounded man trembles instinctively at the approach of the
finger to his wound until it be healed, but Villefort's was one
of those that never close, or if they do, only close to reopen
more agonizing than ever. If at this moment the sweet voice
of Renee had sounded in his ears pleading for mercy, or the
fair Mercedes had entered and said, "In the name of God, I
conjure you to restore me my affianced husband," his cold
and trembling hands would have signed his release; but no
voice broke the stillness of the chamber, and the door was
opened only by Villefort's valet, who came to tell him that
the travelling carriage was in readiness.
Villefort rose, or rather sprang, from his chair, hastily
opened one of the drawers of his desk, emptied all the gold
it contained into his pocket, stood motionless an instant, his
hand pressed to his head, muttered a few inarticulate sounds,
and then, perceiving that his servant had placed his cloak on
his shoulders, he sprang into the carriage, ordering the
postilions to drive to M. de Saint-Meran's. The hapless
Dantes was doomed.

hated the man whose crime separated her from her lover.
Meanwhile what of Mercedes? She had met Fernand at the
corner of the Rue de la Loge; she had returned to the
Catalans, and had despairingly cast herself on her couch.
Fernand, kneeling by her side, took her hand, and covered it
with kisses that Mercedes did not even feel. She passed the
night thus. The lamp went out for want of oil, but she paid
no heed to the darkness, and dawn came, but she knew not
that it was day. Grief had made her blind to all but one
object -- that was Edmond.
"Ah, you are there," said she, at length, turning towards
Fernand.
"I have not quitted you since yesterday," returned Fernand
sorrowfully.
M. Morrel had not readily given up the fight. He had learned
that Dantes had been taken to prison, and he had gone to all
his friends, and the influential persons of the city; but the
report was already in circulation that Dantes was arrested as
a Bonapartist agent; and as the most sanguine looked upon
any attempt of Napoleon to remount the throne as
impossible, he met with nothing but refusal, and had
returned home in despair, declaring that the matter was
serious and that nothing more could be done.
Caderousse was equally restless and uneasy, but instead of
seeking, like M. Morrel, to aid Dantes, he had shut himself
up with two bottles of black currant brandy, in the hope of
drowning reflection. But he did not succeed, and became too
intoxicated to fetch any more drink, and yet not so
intoxicated as to forget what had happened. With his elbows
on the table he sat between the two empty bottles, while
spectres danced in the light of the unsnuffed candle -spectres such as Hoffmann strews over his punch-drenched
pages, like black, fantastic dust.

Danglars alone was content and joyous -- he had got rid of
an enemy and made his own situation on the Pharaon secure.
Danglars was one of those men born with a pen behind the
ear, and an inkstand in place of a heart. Everything with him
was multiplication or subtraction. The life of a man was to
As the marquis had promised, Villefort found the marquise him of far less value than a numeral, especially when, by
and Renee in waiting. He started when he saw Renee, for he taking it away, he could increase the sum total of his own
fancied she was again about to plead for Dantes. Alas, her desires. He went to bed at his usual hour, and slept in peace.
emotions were wholly personal: she was thinking only of Villefort, after having received M. de Salvieux' letter,
Villefort's departure.
embraced Renee, kissed the marquise's hand, and shaken
that of the marquis, started for Paris along the Aix road.
She loved Villefort, and he left her at the moment he was Old Dantes was dying with anxiety to know what had
about to become her husband. Villefort knew not when he become of Edmond. But we know very well what had
should return, and Renee, far from pleading for Dantes, become of Edmond.

32


Chapter 10

The King's Closet At The Tuileries

W

e will leave Villefort on the road to Paris, travelling -thanks to trebled fees -- with all speed, and passing
through two or three apartments, enter at the Tuileries the
little room with the arched window, so well known as
having been the favorite closet of Napoleon and Louis XVIII.,
and now of Louis Philippe.

commenting upon the idea of another, said, --

"That I am exceedingly disquieted, sire."

"Whichever you please -- there to the left."

"Really, have you had a vision of the seven fat kine and the
seven lean kine?"

"Here, sire?"

"Go on, my dear duke, go on -- I listen."

"Sire," said Blacas, who had for a moment the hope of
sacrificing Villefort to his own profit, "I am compelled to tell
you that these are not mere rumors destitute of foundation
which thus disquiet me; but a serious-minded man,
There, seated before a walnut table he had brought with him
deserving all my confidence, and charged by me to watch
from Hartwell, and to which, from one of those fancies not
over the south" (the duke hesitated as he pronounced these
uncommon to great people, he was particularly attached, the
words), "has arrived by post to tell me that a great peril
king, Louis XVIII., was carelessly listening to a man of fifty
threatens the king, and so I hastened to you, sire."
or fifty-two years of age, with gray hair, aristocratic bearing,
and exceedingly gentlemanly attire, and meanwhile making "Mala ducis avi domum," continued Louis XVIII., still
a marginal note in a volume of Gryphius's rather inaccurate, annotating.
but much sought-after, edition of Horace -- a work which "Does your majesty wish me to drop the subject?"
was much indebted to the sagacious observations of the
"By no means, my dear duke; but just stretch out your hand."
philosophical monarch.
"Which?"
"You say, sir" -- said the king.

"No, sire, for that would only betoken for us seven years of
plenty and seven years of scarcity; and with a king as full of
foresight as your majesty, scarcity is not a thing to be
feared."

"l tell you to the left, and you are looking to the right; I mean
on my left -- yes, there. You will find yesterday's report of
the minister of police. But here is M. Dandre himself;" and M.
Dandre, announced by the chamberlain-in-waiting, entered.

"Come in," said Louis XVIII., with repressed smile, "come in,
"Then of what other scourge are you afraid, my dear Blacas?" Baron, and tell the duke all you know -- the latest news of M.
de Bonaparte; do not conceal anything, however serious, -"Sire, I have every reason to believe that a storm is brewing let us see, the Island of Elba is a volcano, and we may expect
in the south."
to have issuing thence flaming and bristling war -- bella,
"Well, my dear duke," replied Louis XVIII., "I think you are horrida bella." M. Dandre leaned very respectfully on the
wrongly informed, and know positively that, on the contrary, back of a chair with his two hands, and said, -it is very fine weather in that direction." Man of ability as he "Has your majesty perused yesterday's report?"
was, Louis XVIII. liked a pleasant jest.
"Yes, yes; but tell the duke himself, who cannot find
"Sire," continued M. de Blacas, "if it only be to reassure a anything, what the report contains -- give him the particulars
faithful servant, will your majesty send into Languedoc, of what the usurper is doing in his islet."
Provence, and Dauphine, trusty men, who will bring you
back a faithful report as to the feeling in these three "Monsieur," said the baron to the duke, "all the servants of
his majesty must approve of the latest intelligence which we
provinces?"
have from the Island of Elba. Bonaparte" -- M. Dandre
"Caninus surdis," replied the king, continuing the looked at Louis XVIII., who, employed in writing a note, did
annotations in his Horace.
not even raise his head. "Bonaparte," continued the baron, "is
"Sire," replied the courtier, laughing, in order that he might mortally wearied, and passes whole days in watching his
seem to comprehend the quotation, "your majesty may be miners at work at Porto-Longone."
perfectly right in relying on the good feeling of France, but I "And scratches himself for amusement," added the king.
fear I am not altogether wrong in dreading some desperate
"Scratches himself?" inquired the duke, "what does your
attempt."
majesty mean?"
"By whom?"
"Yes, indeed, my dear duke. Did you forget that this great
"By Bonaparte, or, at least, by his adherents."
man, this hero, this demigod, is attacked with a malady of
"My dear Blacas," said the king, "you with your alarms the skin which worries him to death, prurigo?"
prevent me from working."
"And, moreover, my dear duke," continued the minister of
"And you, sire, prevent me from sleeping with your
security."

police, "we are almost assured that, in a very short time, the
usurper will be insane."

"Wait, my dear sir, wait a moment; for I have such a
delightful note on the Pastor quum traheret -- wait, and I
will listen to you afterwards."

"Insane?"

"Raving mad; his head becomes weaker. Sometimes he
weeps bitterly, sometimes laughs boisterously, at other time
There was a brief pause, during which Louis XVIII. wrote, in he passes hours on the seashore, flinging stones in the water
a hand as small as possible, another note on the margin of and when the flint makes `duck-and-drake' five or six times,
his Horace, and then looking at the duke with the air of a he appears as delighted as if he had gained another Marengo
man who thinks he has an idea of his own, while he is only or Austerlitz. Now, you must agree that these are
33


CHAPTER 10


THE KING'S CLOSET AT THE TUILERIES

indubitable symptoms of insanity."
"Or of wisdom, my dear baron -- or of wisdom," said Louis
XVIII., laughing; "the greatest captains of antiquity amused
themselves by casting pebbles into the ocean -- see Plutarch's
life of Scipio Africanus."

"I wish to consult you on this passage, `Molli fugiens
anhelitu," you know it refers to a stag flying from a wolf. Are
you not a sportsman and a great wolf-hunter? Well, then,
what do you think of the molli anhelitu?"
"Admirable, sire; but my messenger is like the stag you refer
to, for he has posted two hundred and twenty leagues in
scarcely three days."

M. de Blacas pondered deeply between the confident
monarch and the truthful minister. Villefort, who did not
choose to reveal the whole secret, lest another should reap "Which is undergoing great fatigue and anxiety, my dear
all the benefit of the disclosure, had yet communicated duke, when we have a telegraph which transmits messages
enough to cause him the greatest uneasiness.
in three or four hours, and that without getting in the least
out of breath."
"Well, well, Dandre," said Louis XVIII., "Blacas is not yet
convinced; let us proceed, therefore, to the usurper's "Ah, sire, you recompense but badly this poor young man,
conversion." The minister of police bowed.
who has come so far, and with so much ardor, to give your
majesty useful information. If only for the sake of M. de
"The usurper's conversion!" murmured the duke, looking at
Salvieux, who recommends him to me, I entreat your
the king and Dandre, who spoke alternately, like Virgil's
majesty to receive him graciously."
shepherds. "The usurper converted!"
"M. de Salvieux, my brother's chamberlain?"
"Decidedly, my dear duke."
"Yes, sire."
"In what way converted?"
"He is at Marseilles."
"To good principles. Tell him all about it, baron."
"And writes me thence."
"Why, this is the way of it," said the minister, with the
gravest air in the world: "Napoleon lately had a review, and "Does he speak to you of this conspiracy?"
as two or three of his old veterans expressed a desire to
"No; but strongly recommends M. de Villefort, and begs me
return to France, he gave them their dismissal, and exhorted
to present him to your majesty."
them to `serve the good king.' These were his own words, of
"M. de Villefort!" cried the king, "is the messenger's name M.
that I am certain."
de Villefort?"
"Well, Blacas, what think you of this?" inquired the king
triumphantly, and pausing for a moment from the "Yes, sire."
voluminous scholiast before him.
"And he comes from Marseilles?"
"I say, sire, that the minister of police is greatly deceived or I
am; and as it is impossible it can be the minister of police as
he has the guardianship of the safety and honor of your
majesty, it is probable that I am in error. However, sire, if I
might advise, your majesty will interrogate the person of
whom I spoke to you, and I will urge your majesty to do him
this honor."
"Most willingly, duke; under your auspices I will receive any
person you please, but you must not expect me to be too
confiding. Baron, have you any report more recent than this
dated the 20th February. -- this is the 4th of March?"
"No, sire, but I am hourly expecting one; it may have arrived
since I left my office."

"In person."
"Why did you not mention his name at once?" replied the
king, betraying some uneasiness.
"Sire, I thought his name was unknown to your majesty."
"No, no, Blacas; he is a man of strong and elevated
understanding, ambitious, too, and, pardieu, you know his
father's name!"
"His father?"
"Yes, Noirtier."
"Noirtier the Girondin? -- Noirtier the senator?"

"He himself."
"Go thither, and if there be none -- well, well," continued "And your majesty has employed the son of such a man?"
Louis XVIII., "make one; that is the usual way, is it not?" and
"Blacas, my friend, you have but limited comprehension. I
the king laughed facetiously.
told you Villefort was ambitions, and to attain this ambition
"Oh, sire," replied the minister, "we have no occasion to Villefort would sacrifice everything, even his father."
invent any; every day our desks are loaded with most
circumstantial denunciations, coming from hosts of people "Then, sire, may I present him?"
who hope for some return for services which they seek to "This instant, duke! Where is he?"
render, but cannot; they trust to fortune, and rely upon some
"Waiting below, in my carriage."
unexpected event in some way to justify their predictions."
"Seek him at once."
"Well, sir, go"; said Louis XVIII., "and remember that I am
waiting for you."
"I hasten to do so." The duke left the royal presence with the
speed of a young man; his really sincere royalism made him
"I will but go and return, sire; I shall be back in ten minutes."
youthful again. Louis XVIII. remained alone, and turning his
"And I, sire," said M. de Blacas, "will go and find my eyes on his half-opened Horace, muttered, -messenger."
"Justum et tenacem propositi virum."
"Wait, sir, wait," said Louis XVIII. "Really, M. de Blacas, I
M. de Blacas returned as speedily as he had departed, but in
must change your armorial bearings; I will give you an eagle
the ante-chamber he was forced to appeal to the king's
with outstretched wings, holding in its claws a prey which
authority. Villefort's dusty garb, his costume, which was not
tries in vain to escape, and bearing this device -- Tenax."
of courtly cut, excited the susceptibility of M. de Breze, who
"Sire, I listen," said De Blacas, biting his nails with was all astonishment at finding that this young man had the
impatience.
audacity to enter before the king in such attire. The duke,
34

however, overcame all difficulties with a word -- his
majesty's order; and, in spite of the protestations which the
master of ceremonies made for the honor of his office and
principles, Villefort was introduced.

How did you obtain these details?"

"Sire, the duke is right, and I believe your majesty will think
it equally important."

"And the matter seems serious to you?"

"Sire, they are the results of an examination which I have
made of a man of Marseilles, whom I have watched for some
time, and arrested on the day of my departure. This person,
The king was seated in the same place where the duke had a sailor, of turbulent character, and whom I suspected of
left him. On opening the door, Villefort found himself facing Bonapartism, has been secretly to the Island of Elba. There
him, and the young magistrate's first impulse was to pause.
he saw the grand-marshal, who charged him with an oral
message to a Bonapartist in Paris, whose name I could not
"Come in, M. de Villefort," said the king, "come in." Villefort
extract from him; but this mission was to prepare men's
bowed, and advancing a few steps, waited until the king
minds for a return (it is the man who says this, sire) -- a
should interrogate him.
return which will soon occur."
"M. de Villefort," said Louis XVIII., "the Duc de Blacas
"And where is this man?"
assures me you have some interesting information to
communicate.
"In prison, sire."

"In the first place, and before everything else, sir, is the news
as bad in your opinion as I am asked to believe?"
"Sire, I believe it to be most urgent, but I hope, by the speed I
have used, that it is not irreparable."

"So serious, sire, that when the circumstance surprised me in
the midst of a family festival, on the very day of my
betrothal, I left my bride and friends, postponing everything,
that I might hasten to lay at your majesty's feet the fears
which impressed me, and the assurance of my devotion."

"True," said Louis XVIII., "was there not a marriage
"Speak as fully as you please, sir," said the king, who began
engagement between you and Mademoiselle de
to give way to the emotion which had showed itself in
Saint-Meran?"
Blacas's face and affected Villefort's voice. "Speak, sir, and
pray begin at the beginning; I like order in everything."
"Daughter of one of your majesty's most faithful servants."
"Sire," said Villefort, "I will render a faithful report to your
majesty, but I must entreat your forgiveness if my anxiety
leads to some obscurity in my language." A glance at the
king after this discreet and subtle exordium, assured
Villefort of the benignity of his august auditor, and he went
on: --

"Yes, yes; but let us talk of this plot, M. de Villefort."
"Sire, I fear it is more than a plot; I fear it is a conspiracy."
"A conspiracy in these times," said Louis XVIII., smiling, "is a
thing very easy to meditate, but more difficult to conduct to
an end, inasmuch as, re-established so recently on the throne
of our ancestors, we have our eyes open at once upon the
past, the present, and the future. For the last ten months my
ministers have redoubled their vigilance, in order to watch
the shore of the Mediterranean. If Bonaparte landed at
Naples, the whole coalition would be on foot before he could
even reach Piomoino; if he land in Tuscany, he will be in an
unfriendly territory; if he land in France, it must be with a
handful of men, and the result of that is easily foretold,
execrated as he is by the population. Take courage, sir; but at
the same time rely on our royal gratitude."

"Sire, I have come as rapidly to Paris as possible, to inform
your majesty that I have discovered, in the exercise of my
duties, not a commonplace and insignificant plot, such as is
every day got up in the lower ranks of the people and in the
army, but an actual conspiracy -- a storm which menaces no
less than your majesty's throne. Sire, the usurper is arming
three ships, he meditates some project, which, however mad,
is yet, perhaps, terrible. At this moment he will have left
Elba, to go whither I know not, but assuredly to attempt a
landing either at Naples, or on the coast of Tuscany, or
perhaps on the shores of France. Your majesty is well aware "Ah, here is M. Dandre!" cried de Blacas. At this instant the
that the sovereign of the Island of Elba has maintained his minister of police appeared at the door, pale, trembling, and
as if ready to faint. Villefort was about to retire, but M. de
relations with Italy and France?"
Blacas, taking his hand, restrained him.
"I am, sir," said the king, much agitated; "and recently we
have had information that the Bonapartist clubs have had
meetings in the Rue Saint-Jacques. But proceed, I beg of you.

35


CHAPTER 11


Chapter 11

A

THE CORSICAN OGRE

The Corsican Ogre

t the sight of this agitation Louis XVIII. pushed from
him violently the table at which he was sitting.

"What ails you, baron?" he exclaimed. "You appear quite
aghast. Has your uneasiness anything to do with what M. de
Blacas has told me, and M. de Villefort has just confirmed?"
M. de Blacas moved suddenly towards the baron, but the
fright of the courtier pleaded for the forbearance of the
statesman; and besides, as matters were, it was much more
to his advantage that the prefect of police should triumph
over him than that he should humiliate the prefect.
"Sire" -- stammered the baron.
"Well, what is it?" asked Louis XVIII. The minister of police,
giving way to an impulse of despair, was about to throw
himself at the feet of Louis XVIII., who retreated a step and
frowned.

silence which was equivalent to a complete avowal.
"And Dauphine, sir?" inquired the king, of Villefort. "Do you
think it possible to rouse that as well as Provence?"
"Sire, I am sorry to tell your majesty a cruel fact; but the
feeling in Dauphine is quite the reverse of that in Provence
or Languedoc. The mountaineers are Bonapartists, sire."
"Then," murmured Louis, "he was well informed. And how
many men had he with him?"
"I do not know, sire," answered the minister of police.
"What, you do not know! Have you neglected to obtain
information on that point? Of course it is of no consequence,"
he added, with a withering smile.
"Sire, it was impossible to learn; the despatch simply stated
the fact of the landing and the route taken by the usurper."

"Will you speak?" he said.

"And how did this despatch reach you?" inquired the king.
"Oh, sire, what a dreadful misfortune! I am, indeed, to be The minister bowed his head, and while a deep color
overspread his cheeks, he stammered out, -pitied. I can never forgive myself!"
"Monsieur," said Louis XVIII., "I command you to speak."
"Well, sire, the usurper left Elba on the 26th February, and
landed on the 1st of March."

"By the telegraph, sire." -- Louis XVIII. advanced a step, and
folded his arms over his chest as Napoleon would have
done.

"So then," he exclaimed, turning pale with anger, "seven
conjoined and allied armies overthrew that man. A miracle
"In France, sire, -- at a small port, near Antibes, in the Gulf of of heaven replaced me on the throne of my fathers after
Juan."
five-and-twenty years of exile. I have, during those
five-and-twenty years, spared no pains to understand the
"The usurper landed in France, near Antibes, in the Gulf of
people of France and the interests which were confided to
Juan, two hundred and fifty leagues from Paris, on the 1st of
me; and now, when I see the fruition of my wishes almost
March, and you only acquired this information to-day, the
within reach, the power I hold in my hands bursts, and
4th of March! Well, sir, what you tell me is impossible. You
shatters me to atoms!"
must have received a false report, or you have gone mad."
"Sire, it is fatality!" murmured the minister, feeling that the
"Alas, sire, it is but too true!" Louis made a gesture of
pressure of circumstances, however light a thing to destiny,
indescribable anger and alarm, and then drew himself up as
was too much for any human strength to endure.
if this sudden blow had struck him at the same moment in
heart and countenance.
"What our enemies say of us is then true. We have learnt
nothing, forgotten nothing! If I were betrayed as he was, I
"In France!" he cried, "the usurper in France! Then they did
would console myself; but to be in the midst of persons
not watch over this man. Who knows? they were, perhaps,
elevated by myself to places of honor, who ought to watch
in league with him."
over me more carefully than over themselves, -- for my
"Oh, sire," exclaimed the Duc de Blacas, "M. Dandre is not a fortune is theirs -- before me they were nothing -- after me
man to be accused of treason! Sire, we have all been blind, they will be nothing, and perish miserably from incapacity -and the minister of police has shared the general blindness, ineptitude! Oh, yes, sir, you are right -- it is fatality!"
that is all."
The minister quailed before this outburst of sarcasm. M. de
"But" -- said Villefort, and then suddenly checking himself, Blacas wiped the moisture from his brow. Villefort smiled
he was silent; then he continued, "Your pardon, sire," he said, within himself, for he felt his increased importance.
bowing, "my zeal carried me away. Will your majesty deign
"To fall," continued King Louis, who at the first glance had
to excuse me?"
sounded the abyss on which the monarchy hung suspended,
"Speak, sir, speak boldly," replied Louis. "You alone -- "to fall, and learn of that fall by telegraph! Oh, I would
forewarned us of the evil; now try and aid us with the rather mount the scaffold of my brother, Louis XVI., than
remedy."
thus descend the staircase at the Tuileries driven away by
"Sire," said Villefort, "the usurper is detested in the south; ridicule. Ridicule, sir -- why, you know not its power in
and it seems to me that if he ventured into the south, it France, and yet you ought to know it!"
"And where? In Italy?" asked the king eagerly.

would be easy to raise Languedoc and Provence against
him."
"Yes, assuredly," replied the minister; "but he is advancing
by Gap and Sisteron."
"Advancing -- he is advancing!" said Louis XVIII. "Is he then
advancing on Paris?" The minister of police maintained a
36

"Sire, sire," murmured the minister, "for pity's" -"Approach, M. de Villefort," resumed the king, addressing
the young man, who, motionless and breathless, was
listening to a conversation on which depended the destiny of
a kingdom. "Approach, and tell monsieur that it is possible
to know beforehand all that he has not known."

"Sire, it was really impossible to learn secrets which that man
concealed from all the world."
"Really impossible! Yes -- that is a great word, sir.
Unfortunately, there are great words, as there are great men;
I have measured them. Really impossible for a minister who
has an office, agents, spies, and fifteen hundred thousand
francs for secret service money, to know what is going on at
sixty leagues from the coast of France! Well, then, see, here is
a gentleman who had none of these resources at his disposal
-- a gentleman, only a simple magistrate, who learned more
than you with all your police, and who would have saved
my crown, if, like you, he had the power of directing a
telegraph." The look of the minister of police was turned
with concentrated spite on Villefort, who bent his head in
modest triumph.

"Sire," interposed the minister of police, "I came a moment
ago to give your majesty fresh information which I had
obtained on this head, when your majesty's attention was
attracted by the terrible event that has occurred in the gulf,
and now these facts will cease to interest your majesty."
"On the contrary, sir, -- on the contrary," said Louis XVIII.,
"this affair seems to me to have a decided connection with
that which occupies our attention, and the death of General
Quesnel will, perhaps, put us on the direct track of a great
internal conspiracy." At the name of General Quesnel,
Villefort trembled.

"Everything points to the conclusion, sire," said the minister
of police, "that death was not the result of suicide, as we first
believed, but of assassination. General Quesnel, it appears,
had just left a Bonapartist club when he disappeared. An
"I do not mean that for you, Blacas," continued Louis XVIII.; unknown person had been with him that morning, and
"for if you have discovered nothing, at least you have had made an appointment with him in the Rue Saint-Jacques;
the good sense to persevere in your suspicions. Any other unfortunately, the general's valet, who was dressing his hair
than yourself would have considered the disclosure of M. de at the moment when the stranger entered, heard the street
Villefort insignificant, or else dictated by venal ambition," mentioned, but did not catch the number." As the police
These words were an allusion to the sentiments which the minister related this to the king, Villefort, who looked as if
minister of police had uttered with so much confidence an his very life hung on the speaker's lips, turned alternately
hour before.
red and pale. The king looked towards him.
Villefort understood the king's intent. Any other person
would, perhaps, have been overcome by such an intoxicating
draught of praise; but he feared to make for himself a mortal
enemy of the police minister, although he saw that Dandre
was irrevocably lost. In fact, the minister, who, in the
plenitude of his power, had been unable to unearth
Napoleon's secret, might in despair at his own downfall
interrogate Dantes and so lay bare the motives of Villefort's
plot. Realizing this, Villefort came to the rescue of the
crest-fallen minister, instead of aiding to crush him.

"Do you not think with me, M. de Villefort, that General
Quesnel, whom they believed attached to the usurper, but
who was really entirely devoted to me, has perished the
victim of a Bonapartist ambush?"

"Sire," said Villefort, "the suddenness of this event must
prove to your majesty that the issue is in the hands of
Providence; what your majesty is pleased to attribute to me
as profound perspicacity is simply owing to chance, and I
have profited by that chance, like a good and devoted
servant -- that's all. Do not attribute to me more than I
deserve, sire, that your majesty may never have occasion to
recall the first opinion you have been pleased to form of me."
The minister of police thanked the young man by an
eloquent look, and Villefort understood that he had
succeeded in his design; that is to say, that without forfeiting
the gratitude of the king, he had made a friend of one on
whom, in case of necessity, he might rely.

"Yes, the servant has given his description. He is a man of
from fifty to fifty-two years of age, dark, with black eyes
covered with shaggy eyebrows, and a thick mustache. He
was dressed in a blue frock-coat, buttoned up to the chin,
and wore at his button-hole the rosette of an officer of the
Legion of Honor. Yesterday a person exactly corresponding
with this description was followed, but he was lost sight of
at the corner of the Rue de la Jussienne and the Rue
Coq-Heron." Villefort leaned on the back of an arm-chair, for
as the minister of police went on speaking he felt his legs
bend under him; but when he learned that the unknown had
escaped the vigilance of the agent who followed him, he
breathed again.

"'Tis well," resumed the king. "And now, gentlemen," he
continued, turning towards M. de Blacas and the minister of
police, "I have no further occasion for you, and you may
retire; what now remains to do is in the department of the
minister of war."

"Continue to seek for this man, sir," said the king to the
minister of police; "for if, as I am all but convinced, General
Quesnel, who would have been so useful to us at this
moment, has been murdered, his assassins, Bonapartists or
not, shall be cruelly punished." It required all Villefort's
coolness not to betray the terror with which this declaration
of the king inspired him.

"Fortunately, sire," said M. de Blacas, "we can rely on the
army; your majesty knows how every report confirms their
loyalty and attachment."
"Do not mention reports, duke, to me, for I know now what
confidence to place in them. Yet, speaking of reports, baron,
what have you learned with regard to the affair in the Rue
Saint-Jacques?"
"The affair in the Rue Saint-Jacques!" exclaimed Villefort,
unable to repress an exclamation. Then, suddenly pausing,
he added, "Your pardon, sire, but my devotion to your
majesty has made me forget, not the respect I have, for that is
too deeply engraved in my heart, but the rules of etiquette."
"Go on, go on, sir," replied the king; "you have to-day earned
the right to make inquiries here."

"It is probable, sire," replied Villefort. "But is this all that is
known?"
"They are on the track of the man who appointed the
meeting with him."
"On his track?" said Villefort.

"How strange," continued the king, with some asperity; "the
police think that they have disposed of the whole matter
when they say, `A murder has been committed,' and
especially so when they can add, `And we are on the track of
the guilty persons.'"
"Sire, your majesty will, I trust, be amply satisfied on this
point at least."
"We shall see. I will no longer detain you, M. de Villefort, for
you must be fatigued after so long a journey; go and rest. Of
course you stopped at your father's?" A feeling of faintness
came over Villefort.
"No, sire," he replied, "I alighted at the Hotel de Madrid, in
37


CHAPTER 11


THE CORSICAN OGRE

the Rue de Tournon."

ambition.

"But you have seen him?"

Ten minutes afterwards Villefort reached his hotel, ordered
horses to be ready in two hours, and asked to have his
breakfast brought to him. He was about to begin his repast
when the sound of the bell rang sharp and loud. The valet
opened the door, and Villefort heard some one speak his
name.

"Sire, I went straight to the Duc de Blacas."
"But you will see him, then?"
"I think not, sire."
"Ah, I forgot," said Louis, smiling in a manner which proved
that all these questions were not made without a motive; "I
forgot you and M. Noirtier are not on the best terms possible,
and that is another sacrifice made to the royal cause, and for
which you should be recompensed."
"Sire, the kindness your majesty deigns to evince towards me
is a recompense which so far surpasses my utmost ambition
that I have nothing more to ask for."
"Never mind, sir, we will not forget you; make your mind
easy. In the meanwhile" (the king here detached the cross of
the Legion of Honor which he usually wore over his blue
coat, near the cross of St. Louis, above the order of
Notre-Dame-du-Mont-Carmel and St. Lazare, and gave it to
Villefort) -- "in the meanwhile take this cross."

"Who could know that I was here already?" said the young
man. The valet entered.
"Well," said Villefort, "what is it? -- Who rang? -- Who asked
for me?"
"A stranger who will not send in his name."
"A stranger who will not send in his name! What can he
want with me?"
"He wishes to speak to you."
"To me?"
"Yes."
"Did he mention my name?"

"Sire," said Villefort, "your majesty mistakes; this is an
officer's cross."

"Yes."

"Go, sir," said the king; "and should I forget you (kings'
memories are short), do not be afraid to bring yourself to my
recollection. Baron, send for the minister of war. Blacas,
remain."

"Eh, pardieu," said the individual whose description we
have twice given, entering the door, "what a great deal of
ceremony! Is it the custom in Marseilles for sons to keep
their fathers waiting in their anterooms?"

"What sort of person is he?"
"Ma foi," said Louis XVIII., "take it, such as it is, for I have "Why, sir, a man of about fifty."
not the time to procure you another. Blacas, let it be your
care to see that the brevet is made out and sent to M. de "Short or tall?"
Villefort." Villefort's eyes were filled with tears of joy and "About your own height, sir."
pride; he took the cross and kissed it.
"Dark or fair?"
"And now," he said, "may I inquire what are the orders with
"Dark, -- very dark; with black eyes, black hair, black
which your majesty deigns to honor me?"
eyebrows."
"Take what rest you require, and remember that if you are
"And how dressed?" asked Villefort quickly.
not able to serve me here in Paris, you may be of the greatest
"In a blue frock-coat, buttoned up close, decorated with the
service to me at Marseilles."
Legion of Honor."
"Sire," replied Villefort, bowing, "in an hour I shall have
"It is he!" said Villefort, turning pale.
quitted Paris."

"Ah, sir," said the minister of police to Villefort, as they left "Father!" cried Villefort, "then I was not deceived; I felt sure
the Tuileries, "you entered by luck's door -- your fortune is it must be you."
made."
"Well, then, if you felt so sure," replied the new-comer,
"Will it be long first?" muttered Villefort, saluting the putting his cane in a corner and his hat on a chair, "allow me
minister, whose career was ended, and looking about him to say, my dear Gerard, that it was not very filial of you to
for a hackney-coach. One passed at the moment, which he keep me waiting at the door."
hailed; he gave his address to the driver, and springing in, "Leave us, Germain," said Villefort. The servant quitted the
threw himself on the seat, and gave loose to dreams of apartment with evident signs of astonishment.

38


Chapter 12

Father And Son

M

. Noirtier -- for it was, indeed, he who entered -looked after the servant until the door was closed, and
then, fearing, no doubt, that he might be overheard in the
ante-chamber, he opened the door again, nor was the
precaution useless, as appeared from the rapid retreat of
Germain, who proved that he was not exempt from the sin
which ruined our first parents. M. Noirtier then took the
trouble to close and bolt the ante-chamber door, then that of
the bed-chamber, and then extended his hand to Villefort,
who had followed all his motions with surprise which he
could not conceal.

"By a letter addressed to you from the Island of Elba."

"Well, now, my dear Gerard," said he to the young man,
with a very significant look, "do you know, you seem as if
you were not very glad to see me?"

"I burnt it, for fear that even a fragment should remain; for
that letter must have led to your condemnation."

"My dear father," said Villefort, "I am, on the contrary,
delighted; but I so little expected your visit, that it has
somewhat overcome me."
"But, my dear fellow," replied M. Noirtier, seating himself, "I
might say the same thing to you, when you announce to me
your wedding for the 28th of February, and on the 3rd of
March you turn up here in Paris."

"To me?"
"To you; and which I discovered in the pocket-book of the
messenger. Had that letter fallen into the hands of another,
you, my dear father, would probably ere this have been
shot." Villefort's father laughed.
"Come, come," said he, "will the Restoration adopt imperial
methods so promptly? Shot, my dear boy? What an idea!
Where is the letter you speak of? I know you too well to
suppose you would allow such a thing to pass you."

"And the destruction of your future prospects," replied
Noirtier; "yes, I can easily comprehend that. But I have
nothing to fear while I have you to protect me."
"I do better than that, sir -- I save you."
"You do? Why, really, the thing becomes more and more
dramatic -- explain yourself."
"I must refer again to the club in the Rue Saint-Jacques."

"And if I have come, my dear father," said Gerard, drawing "It appears that this club is rather a bore to the police. Why
closer to M. Noirtier, "do not complain, for it is for you that I didn't they search more vigilantly? They would have found"
came, and my journey will be your salvation."
-"Ah, indeed!" said M. Noirtier, stretching himself out at his
ease in the chair. "Really, pray tell me all about it, for it must
be interesting."
"Father, you have heard speak of a certain Bonapartist club
in the Rue Saint-Jacques?"
"No. 53; yes, I am vice-president."
"Father, your coolness makes me shudder."
"Why, my dear boy, when a man has been proscribed by the
mountaineers, has escaped from Paris in a hay-cart, been
hunted over the plains of Bordeaux by Robespierre's
bloodhounds, he becomes accustomed to most things. But go
on, what about the club in the Rue Saint-Jacques?"

"They have not found; but they are on the track."
"Yes, that is the usual phrase; I am quite familiar with it.
When the police is at fault, it declares that it is on the track;
and the government patiently awaits the day when it comes
to say, with a sneaking air, that the track is lost."
"Yes, but they have found a corpse; the general has been
killed, and in all countries they call that a murder."
"A murder do you call it? Why, there is nothing to prove that
the general was murdered. People are found every day in
the Seine, having thrown themselves in, or having been
drowned from not knowing how to swim."

"Why, they induced General Quesnel to go there, and
General Quesnel, who quitted his own house at nine o'clock
in the evening, was found the next day in the Seine."

"Father, you know very well that the general was not a man
to drown himself in despair, and people do not bathe in the
Seine in the month of January. No, no, do not be deceived;
this was murder in every sense of the word."

"And who told you this fine story?"

"And who thus designated it?"

"The king himself."

"The king himself."

"The king! I thought he was philosopher enough to allow
that there was no murder in politics. In politics, my dear
fellow, you know, as well as I do, there are no men, but ideas
"My dear father, I think I already know what you are about -- no feelings, but interests; in politics we do not kill a man,
to tell me."
we only remove an obstacle, that is all. Would you like to
know how matters have progressed? Well, I will tell you. It
"Ah, you have heard of the landing of the emperor?"
was thought reliance might be placed in General Quesnel; he
"Not so loud, father, I entreat of you -- for your own sake as
was recommended to us from the Island of Elba; one of us
well as mine. Yes, I heard this news, and knew it even before
went to him, and invited him to the Rue Saint-Jacques,
you could; for three days ago I posted from Marseilles to
where he would find some friends. He came there, and the
Paris with all possible speed, half-desperate at the enforced
plan was unfolded to him for leaving Elba, the projected
delay."
landing, etc. When he had heard and comprehended all to
"Three days ago? You are crazy. Why, three days ago the the fullest extent, he replied that he was a royalist. Then all
emperor had not landed."
looked at each other, -- he was made to take an oath, and did
so, but with such an ill grace that it was really tempting
"No matter, I was aware of his intention."
Providence to swear him, and yet, in spite of that, the
"How did you know about it?"
general was allowed to depart free -- perfectly free. Yet he
39
"Well, then, in return for your story," continued Noirtier, "I
will tell you another."


CHAPTER 12


FATHER AND SON

did not return home. What could that mean? Why, my dear
fellow, that on leaving us he lost his way, that's all. A
murder? really, Villefort, you surprise me. You, a deputy
procureur, to found an accusation on such bad premises! Did
I ever say to you, when you were fulfilling your character as
a royalist, and cut off the head of one of my party, `My son,
you have committed a murder?' No, I said, `Very well, sir,
you have gained the victory; to-morrow, perchance, it will be
our turn.'"
"But, father, take care; when our turn comes, our revenge
will be sweeping."
"I do not understand you."
"You rely on the usurper's return?"

"The description of the man who, on the morning of the day
when General Quesnel disappeared, presented himself at his
house."
"Oh, the admirable police have found that out, have they?
And what may be that description?"
"Dark complexion; hair, eyebrows, and whiskers, black; blue
frock-coat, buttoned up to the chin; rosette of an officer of
the Legion of Honor in his button-hole; a hat with wide brim,
and a cane."
"Ah, ha, that's it, is it?" said Noirtier; "and why, then, have
they not laid hands on him?"
"Because yesterday, or the day before, they lost sight of him
at the corner of the Rue Coq-Heron."

"We do."

"Didn't I say that your police were good for nothing?"
"You are mistaken; he will not advance two leagues into the
"Yes; but they may catch him yet."
interior of France without being followed, tracked, and
"True," said Noirtier, looking carelessly around him, "true, if
caught like a wild beast."
this person were not on his guard, as he is," and he added
"My dear fellow, the emperor is at this moment on the way
with a smile, "He will consequently make a few changes in
to Grenoble; on the 10th or 12th he will be at Lyons, and on
his personal appearance." At these words he rose, and put
the 20th or 25th at Paris."
off his frock-coat and cravat, went towards a table on which
"The people will rise."
lay his son's toilet articles, lathered his face, took a razor, and,
with a firm hand, cut off the compromising whiskers.
"Yes, to go and meet him."
Villefort watched him with alarm not devoid of admiration.
"He has but a handful of men with him, and armies will be
His whiskers cut off, Noirtier gave another turn to his hair;
despatched against him."
took, instead of his black cravat, a colored neckerchief which
"Yes, to escort him into the capital. Really, my dear Gerard, lay at the top of an open portmanteau; put on, in lieu of his
you are but a child; you think yourself well informed blue and high-buttoned frock-coat, a coat of Villefort's of
because the telegraph has told you, three days after the dark brown, and cut away in front; tried on before the glass
landing, `The usurper has landed at Cannes with several a narrow-brimmed hat of his son's, which appeared to fit
men. He is pursued.' But where is he? what is he doing? You him perfectly, and, leaving his cane in the corner where he
do not know at all, and in this way they will chase him to had deposited it, he took up a small bamboo switch, cut the
Paris, without drawing a trigger."
air with it once or twice, and walked about with that easy
"Grenoble and Lyons are faithful cities, and will oppose to swagger which was one of his principal characteristics.
him an impassable barrier."

"Well," he said, turning towards his wondering son, when
"Grenoble will open her gates to him with enthusiasm -- all this disguise was completed, "well, do you think your police
Lyons will hasten to welcome him. Believe me, we are as will recognize me now."
well informed as you, and our police are as good as your "No, father," stammered Villefort; "at least, I hope not."
own. Would you like a proof of it? well, you wished to
"And now, my dear boy," continued Noirtier, "I rely on your
conceal your journey from me, and yet I knew of your
prudence to remove all the things which I leave in your
arrival half an hour after you had passed the barrier. You
care."
gave your direction to no one but your postilion, yet I have
your address, and in proof I am here the very instant you are "Oh, rely on me," said Villefort.
going to sit at table. Ring, then, if you please, for a second
"Yes, yes; and now I believe you are right, and that you have
knife, fork, and plate, and we will dine together."
really saved my life; be assured I will return the favor
"Indeed!" replied Villefort, looking at his father with hereafter." Villefort shook his head.
astonishment, "you really do seem very well informed."
"You are not convinced yet?"
"Eh? the thing is simple enough. You who are in power have
"I hope at least, that you may be mistaken."
only the means that money produces -- we who are in
"Shall you see the king again?"
expectation, have those which devotion prompts."
"Devotion!" said Villefort, with a sneer.

"Perhaps."

"Yes, devotion; for that is, I believe, the phrase for hopeful
ambition."

"Would you pass in his eyes for a prophet?"

"Prophets of evil are not in favor at the court, father."
And Villefort's father extended his hand to the bell-rope, to "True, but some day they do them justice; and supposing a
summon the servant whom his son had not called. Villefort second restoration, you would then pass for a great man."
caught his arm.
"Well, what should I say to the king?"
"Wait, my dear father," said the young man, "one word
"Say this to him: `Sire, you are deceived as to the feeling in
more."
France, as to the opinions of the towns, and the prejudices of
"Say on."
the army; he whom in Paris you call the Corsican ogre, who
"However stupid the royalist police may be, they do know at Nevers is styled the usurper, is already saluted as
Bonaparte at Lyons, and emperor at Grenoble. You think he
one terrible thing."
is tracked, pursued, captured; he is advancing as rapidly as
"What is that?"
his own eagles. The soldiers you believe to be dying with
40

hunger, worn out with fatigue, ready to desert, gather like
atoms of snow about the rolling ball as it hastens onward.
Sire, go, leave France to its real master, to him who acquired
it, not by purchase, but by right of conquest; go, sire, not that
you incur any risk, for your adversary is powerful enough to
show you mercy, but because it would be humiliating for a
grandson of Saint Louis to owe his life to the man of Arcola,
Marengo, Austerlitz.' Tell him this, Gerard; or, rather, tell
him nothing. Keep your journey a secret; do not boast of
what you have come to Paris to do, or have done; return
with all speed; enter Marseilles at night, and your house by
the back-door, and there remain, quiet, submissive, secret,
and, above all, inoffensive; for this time, I swear to you, we
shall act like powerful men who know their enemies. Go, my
son -- go, my dear Gerard, and by your obedience to my
paternal orders, or, if you prefer it, friendly counsels, we will
keep you in your place. This will be," added Noirtier, with a
smile, "one means by which you may a second time save me,
if the political balance should some day take another turn,
and cast you aloft while hurling me down. Adieu, my dear
Gerard, and at your next journey alight at my door." Noirtier

left the room when he had finished, with the same calmness
that had characterized him during the whole of this
remarkable and trying conversation. Villefort, pale and
agitated, ran to the window, put aside the curtain, and saw
him pass, cool and collected, by two or three ill-looking men
at the corner of the street, who were there, perhaps, to arrest
a man with black whiskers, and a blue frock-coat, and hat
with broad brim.
Villefort stood watching, breathless, until his father had
disappeared at the Rue Bussy. Then he turned to the various
articles he had left behind him, put the black cravat and blue
frock-coat at the bottom of the portmanteau, threw the hat
into a dark closet, broke the cane into small bits and flung it
in the fire, put on his travelling-cap, and calling his valet,
checked with a look the thousand questions he was ready to
ask, paid his bill, sprang into his carriage, which was ready,
learned at Lyons that Bonaparte had entered Grenoble, and
in the midst of the tumult which prevailed along the road, at
length reached Marseilles, a prey to all the hopes and fears
which enter into the heart of man with ambition and its first
successes.

41


CHAPTER 13


Chapter 13

THE HUNDRED DAYS

The Hundred Days

M

. Noirtier was a true prophet, and things progressed
rapidly, as he had predicted. Every one knows the
history of the famous return from Elba, a return which was
unprecedented in the past, and will probably remain
without a counterpart in the future.

sitting there with his elbow on his desk, and his head leaning
on his hand. He stopped at the door; Villefort gazed at him
as if he had some difficulty in recognizing him; then, after a
brief interval, during which the honest shipowner turned his
hat in his hands, --

Louis XVIII. made but a faint attempt to parry this
unexpected blow; the monarchy he had scarcely
reconstructed tottered on its precarious foundation, and at a
sign from the emperor the incongruous structure of ancient
prejudices and new ideas fell to the ground. Villefort,
therefore, gained nothing save the king's gratitude (which
was rather likely to injure him at the present time) and the
cross of the Legion of Honor, which he had the prudence not
to wear, although M. de Blacas had duly forwarded the
brevet.

"M. Morrel, I believe?" said Villefort.

Napoleon would, doubtless, have deprived Villefort of his
office had it not been for Noirtier, who was all powerful at
court, and thus the Girondin of '93 and the Senator of 1806
protected him who so lately had been his protector. All
Villefort's influence barely enabled him to stifle the secret
Dantes had so nearly divulged. The king's procureur alone
was deprived of his office, being suspected of royalism.

"Everything depends on you."

However, scarcely was the imperial power established -- that
is, scarcely had the emperor re-entered the Tuileries and
begun to issue orders from the closet into which we have
introduced our readers, -- he found on the table there Louis
XVIII.'s half-filled snuff-box, -- scarcely had this occurred
when Marseilles began, in spite of the authorities, to rekindle
the flames of civil war, always smouldering in the south, and
it required but little to excite the populace to acts of far
greater violence than the shouts and insults with which they
assailed the royalists whenever they ventured abroad.
Owing to this change, the worthy shipowner became at that
moment -- we will not say all powerful, because Morrel was
a prudent and rather a timid man, so much so, that many of
the most zealous partisans of Bonaparte accused him of
"moderation" -- but sufficiently influential to make a demand
in favor of Dantes.
Villefort retained his place, but his marriage was put off
until a more favorable opportunity. If the emperor remained
on the throne, Gerard required a different alliance to aid his
career; if Louis XVIII. returned, the influence of M. de
Saint-Meran, like his own, could be vastly increased, and the
marriage be still more suitable. The deputy-procureur was,
therefore, the first magistrate of Marseilles, when one
morning his door opened, and M. Morrel was announced.
Any one else would have hastened to receive him; but
Villefort was a man of ability, and he knew this would be a
sign of weakness. He made Morrel wait in the ante-chamber,
although he had no one with him, for the simple reason that
the king's procureur always makes every one wait, and after
passing a quarter of an hour in reading the papers, he
ordered M. Morrel to be admitted.
Morrel expected Villefort would be dejected; he found him
as he had found him six weeks before, calm, firm, and full of
that glacial politeness, that most insurmountable barrier
which separates the well-bred from the vulgar man.

"Yes, sir."
"Come nearer," said the magistrate, with a patronizing wave
of the hand, "and tell me to what circumstance I owe the
honor of this visit."
"Do you not guess, monsieur?" asked Morrel.
"Not in the least; but if I can serve you in any way I shall be
delighted."
"Explain yourself, pray."
"Monsieur," said Morrel, recovering his assurance as he
proceeded, "do you recollect that a few days before the
landing of his majesty the emperor, I came to intercede for a
young man, the mate of my ship, who was accused of being
concerned in correspondence with the Island of Elba? What
was the other day a crime is to-day a title to favor. You then
served Louis XVIII., and you did not show any favor -- it
was your duty; to-day you serve Napoleon, and you ought
to protect him -- it is equally your duty; I come, therefore, to
ask what has become of him?"
Villefort by a strong effort sought to control himself. "What
is his name?" said he. "Tell me his name."
"Edmond Dantes."
Villefort would probably have rather stood opposite the
muzzle of a pistol at five-and-twenty paces than have heard
this name spoken; but he did not blanch.
"Dantes," repeated he, "Edmond Dantes."
"Yes, monsieur." Villefort opened a large register, then went
to a table, from the table turned to his registers, and then,
turning to Morrel, -"Are you quite sure you are not mistaken, monsieur?" said
he, in the most natural tone in the world.
Had Morrel been a more quick-sighted man, or better versed
in these matters, he would have been surprised at the king's
procureur answering him on such a subject, instead of
referring him to the governors of the prison or the prefect of
the department. But Morrel, disappointed in his expectations
of exciting fear, was conscious only of the other's
condescension. Villefort had calculated rightly.
"No," said Morrel; "I am not mistaken. I have known him for
ten years, the last four of which he was in my service. Do not
you recollect, I came about six weeks ago to plead for
clemency, as I come to-day to plead for justice. You received
me very coldly. Oh, the royalists were very severe with the
Bonapartists in those days."

"Monsieur," returned Villefort, "I was then a royalist, because
I believed the Bourbons not only the heirs to the throne, but
the chosen of the nation. The miraculous return of Napoleon
He had entered Villefort's office expecting that the has conquered me, the legitimate monarch is he who is loved
magistrate would tremble at the sight of him; on the contrary, by his people."
he felt a cold shudder all over him when he saw Villefort
42

"That's right!" cried Morrel. "I like to hear you speak thus,
and I augur well for Edmond from it."

be suffering." Villefort shuddered at the suggestion; but he
had gone too far to draw back. Dantes must be crushed to
gratify Villefort's ambition.

"Wait a moment," said Villefort, turning over the leaves of a
register; "I have it -- a sailor, who was about to marry a Villefort dictated a petition, in which, from an excellent
young Catalan girl. I recollect now; it was a very serious intention, no doubt, Dantes' patriotic services were
charge."
exaggerated, and he was made out one of the most active
agents of Napoleon's return. It was evident that at the sight
"How so?"
of this document the minister would instantly release him.
"You know that when he left here he was taken to the Palais The petition finished, Villefort read it aloud.
de Justice."
"That will do," said he; "leave the rest to me."
"Well?"
"Will the petition go soon?"
"I made my report to the authorities at Paris, and a week
"To-day."
after he was carried off."
"Countersigned by you?"
"Carried off!" said Morrel. "What can they have done with
him?"
"The best thing I can do will be to certify the truth of the
contents of your petition." And, sitting down, Villefort wrote
"Oh, he has been taken to Fenestrelles, to Pignerol, or to the
the certificate at the bottom.
Sainte-Marguerite islands. Some fine morning he will return
to take command of your vessel."
"What more is to be done?"
"Come when he will, it shall be kept for him. But how is it he "I will do whatever is necessary." This assurance delighted
is not already returned? It seems to me the first care of Morrel, who took leave of Villefort, and hastened to
government should be to set at liberty those who have announce to old Dantes that he would soon see his son.
suffered for their adherence to it."
As for Villefort, instead of sending to Paris, he carefully
"Do not be too hasty, M. Morrel," replied Villefort. "The preserved the petition that so fearfully compromised Dantes,
order of imprisonment came from high authority, and the in the hopes of an event that seemed not unlikely, -- that is, a
order for his liberation must proceed from the same source; second restoration. Dantes remained a prisoner, and heard
and, as Napoleon has scarcely been reinstated a fortnight, not the noise of the fall of Louis XVIII.'s throne, or the still
the letters have not yet been forwarded."
more tragic destruction of the empire.
"But," said Morrel, "is there no way of expediting all these Twice during the Hundred Days had Morrel renewed his
formalities -- of releasing him from arrest?"
demand, and twice had Villefort soothed him with promises.
At last there was Waterloo, and Morrel came no more; he
"There has been no arrest."
had done all that was in his power, and any fresh attempt
"How?"
would only compromise himself uselessly.
"It is sometimes essential to government to cause a man's
disappearance without leaving any traces, so that no written
forms or documents may defeat their wishes."
"It might be so under the Bourbons, but at present" -"It has always been so, my dear Morrel, since the reign of
Louis XIV. The emperor is more strict in prison discipline
than even Louis himself, and the number of prisoners whose
names are not on the register is incalculable." Had Morrel
even any suspicions, so much kindness would have
dispelled them.

Louis XVIII. remounted the throne; Villefort, to whom
Marseilles had become filled with remorseful memories,
sought and obtained the situation of king's procureur at
Toulouse, and a fortnight afterwards he married
Mademoiselle de Saint-Meran, whose father now stood
higher at court than ever.

And so Dantes, after the Hundred Days and after Waterloo,
remained in his dungeon, forgotten of earth and heaven.
Danglars comprehended the full extent of the wretched fate
that overwhelmed Dantes; and, when Napoleon returned to
France, he, after the manner of mediocre minds, termed the
"Well, M. de Villefort, how would you advise me to act?" coincidence, "a decree of Providence." But when Napoleon
asked he.
returned to Paris, Danglars' heart failed him, and he lived in
constant fear of Dantes' return on a mission of vengeance.
"Petition the minister."
He therefore informed M. Morrel of his wish to quit the sea,
"Oh, I know what that is; the minister receives two hundred
and obtained a recommendation from him to a Spanish
petitions every day, and does not read three."
merchant, into whose service he entered at the end of March,
"That is true; but he will read a petition countersigned and that is, ten or twelve days after Napoleon's return. He then
presented by me."
left for Madrid, and was no more heard of.
"And will you undertake to deliver it?"

Fernand understood nothing except that Dantes was absent.
What had become of him he cared not to inquire. Only,
during the respite the absence of his rival afforded him, he
reflected, partly on the means of deceiving Mercedes as to
the cause of his absence, partly on plans of emigration and
abduction, as from time to time he sat sad and motionless on
the summit of Cape Pharo, at the spot from whence
"But how shall I address the minister?"
Marseilles and the Catalans are visible, watching for the
"Sit down there," said Villefort, giving up his place to Morrel, apparition of a young and handsome man, who was for him
also the messenger of vengeance. Fernand's mind was made
"and write what I dictate."
up; he would shoot Dantes, and then kill himself. But
"Will you be so good?"
Fernand was mistaken; a man of his disposition never kills
"Certainly. But lose no time; we have lost too much already." himself, for he constantly hopes.
"With the greatest pleasure. Dantes was then guilty, and now
he is innocent, and it is as much my duty to free him as it
was to condemn him." Villefort thus forestalled any danger
of an inquiry, which, however improbable it might be, if it
did take place would leave him defenceless.

"That is true. Only think what the poor fellow may even now

During this time the empire made its last conscription, and
43


CHAPTER 13


THE HUNDRED DAYS

every man in France capable of bearing arms rushed to obey
the summons of the emperor. Fernand departed with the rest,
bearing with him the terrible thought that while he was
away, his rival would perhaps return and marry Mercedes.
Had Fernand really meant to kill himself, he would have
done so when he parted from Mercedes. His devotion, and
the compassion he showed for her misfortunes, produced
the effect they always produce on noble minds -- Mercedes
had always had a sincere regard for Fernand, and this was
now strengthened by gratitude.
"My brother," said she as she placed his knapsack on his
shoulders, "be careful of yourself, for if you are killed, I shall
be alone in the world." These words carried a ray of hope
into Fernand's heart. Should Dantes not return, Mercedes
might one day be his.
Mercedes was left alone face to face with the vast plain that
had never seemed so barren, and the sea that had never
seemed so vast. Bathed in tears she wandered about the
Catalan village. Sometimes she stood mute and motionless

44

as a statue, looking towards Marseilles, at other times gazing
on the sea, and debating as to whether it were not better to
cast herself into the abyss of the ocean, and thus end her
woes. It was not want of courage that prevented her putting
this resolution into execution; but her religious feelings came
to her aid and saved her. Caderousse was, like Fernand,
enrolled in the army, but, being married and eight years
older, he was merely sent to the frontier. Old Dantes, who
was only sustained by hope, lost all hope at Napoleon's
downfall. Five months after he had been separated from his
son, and almost at the hour of his arrest, he breathed his last
in Mercedes' arms. M. Morrel paid the expenses of his
funeral, and a few small debts the poor old man had
contracted.
There was more than benevolence in this action; there was
courage; the south was aflame, and to assist, even on his
death-bed, the father of so dangerous a Bonapartist as
Dantes, was stigmatized as a crime.


Chapter 14

The Two Prisoners

A

year after Louis XVIII.'s restoration, a visit was made by
the inspector-general of prisons. Dantes in his cell
heard the noise of preparation, -- sounds that at the depth
where he lay would have been inaudible to any but the ear
of a prisoner, who could hear the plash of the drop of water
that every hour fell from the roof of his dungeon. He
guessed something uncommon was passing among the
living; but he had so long ceased to have any intercourse
with the world, that he looked upon himself as dead.
The inspector visited, one after another, the cells and
dungeons of several of the prisoners, whose good behavior
or stupidity recommended them to the clemency of the
government. He inquired how they were fed, and if they had
any request to make. The universal response was, that the
fare was detestable, and that they wanted to be set free.

inspector. He was, as this remark shows, a man full of
philanthropy, and in every way fit for his office.
"You are right, sir," replied the governor; "and this remark
proves that you have deeply considered the subject. Now we
have in a dungeon about twenty feet distant, and to which
you descend by another stair, an abbe, formerly leader of a
party in Italy, who has been here since 1811, and in 1813 he
went mad, and the change is astonishing. He used to weep,
he now laughs; he grew thin, he now grows fat. You had
better see him, for his madness is amusing."
"I will see them both," returned the inspector; "I must
conscientiously perform my duty." This was the inspector's
first visit; he wished to display his authority.
"Let us visit this one first," added he.

The inspector asked if they had anything else to ask for. "By all means," replied the governor, and he signed to the
They shook their heads. What could they desire beyond their turnkey to open the door. At the sound of the key turning in
the lock, and the creaking of the hinges, Dantes, who was
liberty? The inspector turned smilingly to the governor.
crouched in a corner of the dungeon, whence he could see
"I do not know what reason government can assign for these
the ray of light that came through a narrow iron grating
useless visits; when you see one prisoner, you see all, -above, raised his head. Seeing a stranger, escorted by two
always the same thing, -- ill fed and innocent. Are there any
turnkeys holding torches and accompanied by two soldiers,
others?"
and to whom the governor spoke bareheaded, Dantes, who
"Yes; the dangerous and mad prisoners are in the dungeons." guessed the truth, and that the moment to address himself to
the superior authorities was come, sprang forward with
"Let us visit them," said the inspector with an air of fatigue.
clasped hands.
"We must play the farce to the end. Let us see the dungeons."
The soldiers interposed their bayonets, for they thought that
"Let us first send for two soldiers," said the governor. "The
he was about to attack the inspector, and the latter recoiled
prisoners sometimes, through mere uneasiness of life, and in
two or three steps. Dantes saw that he was looked upon as
order to be sentenced to death, commit acts of useless
dangerous. Then, infusing all the humility he possessed into
violence, and you might fall a victim."
his eyes and voice, he addressed the inspector, and sought to
"Take all needful precautions," replied the inspector.
inspire him with pity.
Two soldiers were accordingly sent for, and the inspector The inspector listened attentively; then, turning to the
descended a stairway, so foul, so humid, so dark, as to be governor, observed, "He will become religious -- he is
loathsome to sight, smell, and respiration.
already more gentle; he is afraid, and retreated before the
bayonets -- madmen are not afraid of anything; I made some
"Oh," cried the inspector, "who can live here?"
curious observations on this at Charenton." Then, turning to
"A most dangerous conspirator, a man we are ordered to the prisoner, "What is it you want?" said he.
keep the most strict watch over, as he is daring and resolute."
"I want to know what crime I have committed -- to be tried;
"He is alone?"
and if I am guilty, to be shot; if innocent, to be set at liberty."
"Certainly."
"Are you well fed?" said the inspector.
"How long has he been there?"
"Nearly a year."
"Was he placed here when he first arrived?"
"No; not until he attempted to kill the turnkey, who took his
food to him."
"To kill the turnkey?"
"Yes, the very one who is lighting us. Is it not true, Antoine?"
asked the governor.

"I believe so; I don't know; it's of no consequence. What
matters really, not only to me, but to officers of justice and
the king, is that an innocent man should languish in prison,
the victim of an infamous denunciation, to die here cursing
his executioners."
"You are very humble to-day," remarked the governor; "you
are not so always; the other day, for instance, when you tried
to kill the turnkey."

"True enough; he wanted to kill me!" returned the turnkey.

"It is true, sir, and I beg his pardon, for he has always been
very good to me, but I was mad."

"He must be mad," said the inspector.

"And you are not so any longer?"

"He is worse than that, -- he is a devil!" returned the turnkey.

"No; captivity has subdued me -- I have been here so long."

"Shall I complain of him?" demanded the inspector.

"So long? -- when were you arrested, then?" asked the
inspector.

"Oh, no; it is useless. Besides, he is almost mad now, and in
"The 28th of February, 1815, at half-past two in the
another year he will be quite so."
afternoon."
"So much the better for him, -- he will suffer less," said the
45


CHAPTER 14


THE TWO PRISONERS

"To-day is the 30th of July, 1816, -- why it is but seventeen
months."
"Only seventeen months," replied Dantes. "Oh, you do not
know what is seventeen months in prison! -- seventeen ages
rather, especially to a man who, like me, had arrived at the
summit of his ambition -- to a man, who, like me, was on the
point of marrying a woman he adored, who saw an
honorable career opened before him, and who loses all in an
instant -- who sees his prospects destroyed, and is ignorant
of the fate of his affianced wife, and whether his aged father
be still living! Seventeen months captivity to a sailor
accustomed to the boundless ocean, is a worse punishment
than human crime ever merited. Have pity on me, then, and
ask for me, not intelligence, but a trial; not pardon, but a
verdict -- a trial, sir, I ask only for a trial; that, surely, cannot
be denied to one who is accused!"

"No. 27," said the inspector.
"It is here; unlock the door, Antoine." The turnkey obeyed,
and the inspector gazed curiously into the chamber of the
"mad abbe."
In the centre of the cell, in a circle traced with a fragment of
plaster detached from the wall, sat a man whose tattered
garments scarcely covered him. He was drawing in this
circle geometrical lines, and seemed as much absorbed in his
problem as Archimedes was when the soldier of Marcellus
slew him.
He did not move at the sound of the door, and continued his
calculations until the flash of the torches lighted up with an
unwonted glare the sombre walls of his cell; then, raising his
head, he perceived with astonishment the number of persons
present. He hastily seized the coverlet of his bed, and
wrapped it round him.

"We shall see," said the inspector; then, turning to the
governor, "On my word, the poor devil touches me. You "What is it you want?" said the inspector.
must show me the proofs against him."
"I, monsieur," replied the abbe with an air of surprise -- "I
want nothing."
"Certainly; but you will find terrible charges."
"Monsieur," continued Dantes, "I know it is not in your
power to release me; but you can plead for me -- you can
have me tried -- and that is all I ask. Let me know my crime,
and the reason why I was condemned. Uncertainty is worse
than all."

"You do not understand," continued the inspector; "I am sent
here by government to visit the prison, and hear the requests
of the prisoners."

"Go on with the lights," said the inspector.

"There, now," whispered the governor, "it is just as I told
you."

"Monsieur," cried Dantes, "I can tell by your voice you are
touched with pity; tell me at least to hope."
"I cannot tell you that," replied the inspector; "I can only
promise to examine into your case."
"Oh, I am free -- then I am saved!"
"Who arrested you?"
"M. Villefort. See him, and hear what he says."

"Oh, that is different," cried the abbe; "and we shall
understand each other, I hope."

"Monsieur," continued the prisoner, "I am the Abbe Faria,
born at Rome. I was for twenty years Cardinal Spada's
secretary; I was arrested, why, I know not, toward the
beginning of the year 1811; since then I have demanded my
liberty from the Italian and French government."
"Why from the French government?"

"M. Villefort is no longer at Marseilles; he is now at
Toulouse."

"Because I was arrested at Piombino, and I presume that, like
Milan and Florence, Piombino has become the capital of
some French department."

"I am no longer surprised at my detention," murmured
Dantes, "since my only protector is removed."

"Ah," said the inspector, "you have not the latest news from
Italy?"

"Had M. de Villefort any cause of personal dislike to you?"

"My information dates from the day on which I was
arrested," returned the Abbe Faria; "and as the emperor had
created the kingdom of Rome for his infant son, I presume
that he has realized the dream of Machiavelli and Caesar
Borgia, which was to make Italy a united kingdom."

"None; on the contrary, he was very kind to me."
"I can, then, rely on the notes he has left concerning you?"
"Entirely."

"That is well; wait patiently, then." Dantes fell on his knees, "Monsieur," returned the inspector, "providence has changed
and prayed earnestly. The door closed; but this time a fresh this gigantic plan you advocate so warmly."
inmate was left with Dantes -- hope.
"It is the only means of rendering Italy strong, happy, and
"Will you see the register at once," asked the governor, "or independent."
proceed to the other cell?"

"Very possibly; only I am not come to discuss politics, but to
"Let us visit them all," said the inspector. "If I once went up inquire if you have anything to ask or to complain of."
those stairs. I should never have the courage to come down "The food is the same as in other prisons, -- that is, very bad;
again."
the lodging is very unhealthful, but, on the whole, passable
"Ah, this one is not like the other, and his madness is less for a dungeon; but it is not that which I wish to speak of, but
a secret I have to reveal of the greatest importance."
affecting than this one's display of reason."
"What is his folly?"

"We are coming to the point," whispered the governor.

"He fancies he possesses an immense treasure. The first year
he offered government a million of francs for his release; the
second, two; the third, three; and so on progressively. He is
now in his fifth year of captivity; he will ask to speak to you
in private, and offer you five millions."

"It is for that reason I am delighted to see you," continued
the abbe, "although you have disturbed me in a most
important calculation, which, if it succeeded, would possibly
change Newton's system. Could you allow me a few words
in private."

"How curious! -- what is his name?"

"What did I tell you?" said the governor.

"The Abbe Faria."

"You knew him," returned the inspector with a smile.

46

"What you ask is impossible, monsieur," continued he,
addressing Faria.
"But," said the abbe, "I would speak to you of a large sum,
amounting to five millions."

"Counting his treasures," replied the governor.
Faria replied to this sarcasm with a glance of profound
contempt. They went out. The turnkey closed the door
behind them.

"The very sum you named," whispered the inspector in his
turn.

"He was wealthy once, perhaps?" said the inspector.

my liberty."

The inspector kept his word with Dantes; he examined the
register, and found the following note concerning him: --

"Or dreamed he was, and awoke mad."
"However," continued Faria, seeing that the inspector was
"After all," said the inspector, "if he had been rich, he would
about to depart, "it is not absolutely necessary for us to be
not have been here." So the matter ended for the Abbe Faria.
alone; the governor can be present."
He remained in his cell, and this visit only increased the
"Unfortunately," said the governor, "I know beforehand belief in his insanity.
what you are about to say; it concerns your treasures, does it
Caligula or Nero, those treasure-seekers, those desirers of
not?" Faria fixed his eyes on him with an expression that
the impossible, would have accorded to the poor wretch, in
would have convinced any one else of his sanity.
exchange for his wealth, the liberty he so earnestly prayed
"Of course," said he; "of what else should I speak?"
for. But the kings of modern times, restrained by the limits of
mere probability, have neither courage nor desire. They fear
"Mr. Inspector," continued the governor, "I can tell you the
the ear that hears their orders, and the eye that scrutinizes
story as well as he, for it has been dinned in my ears for the
their actions. Formerly they believed themselves sprung
last four or five years."
from Jupiter, and shielded by their birth; but nowadays they
"That proves," returned the abbe, "that you are like those of are not inviolable.
Holy Writ, who having ears hear not, and having eyes see
It has always been against the policy of despotic
not."
governments to suffer the victims of their persecutions to
"My dear sir, the government is rich and does not want your reappear. As the Inquisition rarely allowed its victims to be
treasures," replied the inspector; "keep them until you are seen with their limbs distorted and their flesh lacerated by
liberated." The abbe's eyes glistened; he seized the torture, so madness is always concealed in its cell, from
inspector's hand.
whence, should it depart, it is conveyed to some gloomy
"But what if I am not liberated," cried he, "and am detained hospital, where the doctor has no thought for man or mind
here until my death? this treasure will be lost. Had not in the mutilated being the jailer delivers to him. The very
government better profit by it? I will offer six millions, and I madness of the Abbe Faria, gone mad in prison, condemned
will content myself with the rest, if they will only give me him to perpetual captivity.
"On my word," said the inspector in a low tone, "had I not
been told beforehand that this man was mad, I should
believe what he says."
"I am not mad," replied Faria, with that acuteness of hearing
peculiar to prisoners. "The treasure I speak of really exists,
and I offer to sign an agreement with you, in which I
promise to lead you to the spot where you shall dig; and if I
deceive you, bring me here again, -- I ask no more."
The governor laughed. "Is the spot far from here?"
"A hundred leagues."

Edmond Dantes:
Violent Bonapartist; took an active part in the return from
Elba.
The greatest watchfulness and care to be exercised.
This note was in a different hand from the rest, which
showed that it had been added since his confinement. The
inspector could not contend against this accusation; he
simply wrote, -- "Nothing to be done."

This visit had infused new vigor into Dantes; he had, till
then, forgotten the date; but now, with a fragment of plaster,
he wrote the date, 30th July, 1816, and made a mark every
day, in order not to lose his reckoning again. Days and
weeks passed away, then months -- Dantes still waited; he at
"The scheme is well known," said the inspector; "and the first expected to be freed in a fortnight. This fortnight
expired, he decided that the inspector would do nothing
abbe's plan has not even the merit of originality."
until his return to Paris, and that he would not reach there
Then turning to Faria -- "I inquired if you are well fed?" said until his circuit was finished, he therefore fixed three months;
he.
three months passed away, then six more. Finally ten
"Swear to me," replied Faria, "to free me if what I tell you months and a half had gone by and no favorable change had
taken place, and Dantes began to fancy the inspector's visit
prove true, and I will stay here while you go to the spot."
but a dream, an illusion of the brain.
"Are you well fed?" repeated the inspector.
At the expiration of a year the governor was transferred; he
"Monsieur, you run no risk, for, as I told you, I will stay here;
had obtained charge of the fortress at Ham. He took with
so there is no chance of my escaping."
him several of his subordinates, and amongst them Dantes'
"You do not reply to my question," replied the inspector jailer. A new governor arrived; it would have been too
impatiently.
tedious to acquire the names of the prisoners; he learned
"Nor you to mine," cried the abbe. "You will not accept my their numbers instead. This horrible place contained fifty
gold; I will keep it for myself. You refuse me my liberty; God cells; their inhabitants were designated by the numbers of
will give it me." And the abbe, casting away his coverlet, their cell, and the unhappy young man was no longer called
Edmond Dantes -- he was now number 34.
resumed his place, and continued his calculations.
"It is not ill-planned," said the governor. "If all the prisoners
took it into their heads to travel a hundred leagues, and their
guardians consented to accompany them, they would have a
capital chance of escaping."

"What is he doing there?" said the inspector.
47


CHAPTER 15


Chapter 15

NUMBER 34 AND NUMBER 27

Number 34 And Number 27

D

antes passed through all the stages of torture natural to
prisoners in suspense. He was sustained at first by that
pride of conscious innocence which is the sequence to hope;
then he began to doubt his own innocence, which justified in
some measure the governor's belief in his mental alienation;
and then, relaxing his sentiment of pride, he addressed his
supplications, not to God, but to man. God is always the last
resource. Unfortunates, who ought to begin with God, do
not have any hope in him till they have exhausted all other
means of deliverance.
Dantes asked to be removed from his present dungeon into
another; for a change, however disadvantageous, was still a
change, and would afford him some amusement. He
entreated to be allowed to walk about, to have fresh air,
books, and writing materials. His requests were not granted,
but he went on asking all the same. He accustomed himself
to speaking to the new jailer, although the latter was, if
possible, more taciturn than the old one; but still, to speak to
a man, even though mute, was something. Dantes spoke for
the sake of hearing his own voice; he had tried to speak
when alone, but the sound of his voice terrified him. Often,
before his captivity, Dantes, mind had revolted at the idea of
assemblages of prisoners, made up of thieves, vagabonds,
and murderers. He now wished to be amongst them, in
order to see some other face besides that of his jailer; he
sighed for the galleys, with the infamous costume, the chain,
and the brand on the shoulder. The galley-slaves breathed
the fresh air of heaven, and saw each other. They were very
happy. He besought the jailer one day to let him have a
companion, were it even the mad abbe.
The jailer, though rough and hardened by the constant sight
of so much suffering, was yet a man. At the bottom of his
heart he had often had a feeling of pity for this unhappy
young man who suffered so; and he laid the request of
number 34 before the governor; but the latter sapiently
imagined that Dantes wished to conspire or attempt an
escape, and refused his request. Dantes had exhausted all
human resources, and he then turned to God.
All the pious ideas that had been so long forgotten, returned;
he recollected the prayers his mother had taught him, and
discovered a new meaning in every word; for in prosperity
prayers seem but a mere medley of words, until misfortune
comes and the unhappy sufferer first understands the
meaning of the sublime language in which he invokes the
pity of heaven! He prayed, and prayed aloud, no longer
terrified at the sound of his own voice, for he fell into a sort
of ecstasy. He laid every action of his life before the
Almighty, proposed tasks to accomplish, and at the end of
every prayer introduced the entreaty oftener addressed to
man than to God: "Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive
them that trespass against us." Yet in spite of his earnest
prayers, Dantes remained a prisoner.

doubtful. Nineteen years of light to reflect upon in eternal
darkness! No distraction could come to his aid; his energetic
spirit, that would have exalted in thus revisiting the past,
was imprisoned like an eagle in a cage. He clung to one idea
-- that of his happiness, destroyed, without apparent cause,
by an unheard-of fatality; he considered and reconsidered
this idea, devoured it (so to speak), as the implacable
Ugolino devours the skull of Archbishop Roger in the
Inferno of Dante.
Rage supplanted religious fervor. Dantes uttered
blasphemies that made his jailer recoil with horror, dashed
himself furiously against the walls of his prison, wreaked his
anger upon everything, and chiefly upon himself, so that the
least thing, -- a grain of sand, a straw, or a breath of air that
annoyed him, led to paroxysms of fury. Then the letter that
Villefort had showed to him recurred to his mind, and every
line gleamed forth in fiery letters on the wall like the mene
tekel upharsin of Belshazzar. He told himself that it was the
enmity of man, and not the vengeance of heaven, that had
thus plunged him into the deepest misery. He consigned his
unknown persecutors to the most horrible tortures he could
imagine, and found them all insufficient, because after
torture came death, and after death, if not repose, at least the
boon of unconsciousness.
By dint of constantly dwelling on the idea that tranquillity
was death, and if punishment were the end in view other
tortures than death must be invented, he began to reflect on
suicide. Unhappy he, who, on the brink of misfortune,
broods over ideas like these!
Before him is a dead sea that stretches in azure calm before
the eye; but he who unwarily ventures within its embrace
finds himself struggling with a monster that would drag him
down to perdition. Once thus ensnared, unless the
protecting hand of God snatch him thence, all is over, and
his struggles but tend to hasten his destruction. This state of
mental anguish is, however, less terrible than the sufferings
that precede or the punishment that possibly will follow.
There is a sort of consolation at the contemplation of the
yawning abyss, at the bottom of which lie darkness and
obscurity.
Edmond found some solace in these ideas. All his sorrows,
all his sufferings, with their train of gloomy spectres, fled
from his cell when the angel of death seemed about to enter.
Dantes reviewed his past life with composure, and, looking
forward with terror to his future existence, chose that middle
line that seemed to afford him a refuge.

"Sometimes," said he, "in my voyages, when I was a man and
commanded other men, I have seen the heavens overcast, the
sea rage and foam, the storm arise, and, like a monstrous
bird, beating the two horizons with its wings. Then I felt that
my vessel was a vain refuge, that trembled and shook before
the tempest. Soon the fury of the waves and the sight of the
Then gloom settled heavily upon him. Dantes was a man of
sharp rocks announced the approach of death, and death
great simplicity of thought, and without education; he could
then terrified me, and I used all my skill and intelligence as a
not, therefore, in the solitude of his dungeon, traverse in
man and a sailor to struggle against the wrath of God. But I
mental vision the history of the ages, bring to life the nations
did so because I was happy, because I had not courted death,
that had perished, and rebuild the ancient cities so vast and
because to be cast upon a bed of rocks and seaweed seemed
stupendous in the light of the imagination, and that pass
terrible, because I was unwilling that I, a creature made for
before the eye glowing with celestial colors in Martin's
the service of God, should serve for food to the gulls and
Babylonian pictures. He could not do this, he whose past life
ravens. But now it is different; I have lost all that bound me
was so short, whose present so melancholy, and his future so
to life, death smiles and invites me to repose; I die after my
48

own manner, I die exhausted and broken-spirited, as I fall those dreams that forerun death!
asleep when I have paced three thousand times round my
Edmond still heard the sound. It lasted nearly three hours;
cell."
he then heard a noise of something falling, and all was silent.
No sooner had this idea taken possession of him than he
Some hours afterwards it began again, nearer and more
became more composed, arranged his couch to the best of
distinct. Edmond was intensely interested. Suddenly the
his power, ate little and slept less, and found existence
jailer entered.
almost supportable, because he felt that he could throw it off
at pleasure, like a worn-out garment. Two methods of For a week since he had resolved to die, and during the four
self-destruction were at his disposal. He could hang himself days that he had been carrying out his purpose, Edmond
with his handkerchief to the window bars, or refuse food had not spoken to the attendant, had not answered him
and die of starvation. But the first was repugnant to him. when he inquired what was the matter with him, and turned
Dantes had always entertained the greatest horror of pirates, his face to the wall when he looked too curiously at him; but
who are hung up to the yard-arm; he would not die by what now the jailer might hear the noise and put an end to it, and
seemed an infamous death. He resolved to adopt the second, so destroy a ray of something like hope that soothed his last
and began that day to carry out his resolve. Nearly four moments.
years had passed away; at the end of the second he had The jailer brought him his breakfast. Dantes raised himself
ceased to mark the lapse of time.
up and began to talk about everything; about the bad quality
Dantes said, "I wish to die," and had chosen the manner of
his death, and fearful of changing his mind, he had taken an
oath to die. "When my morning and evening meals are
brought," thought he, "I will cast them out of the window,
and they will think that I have eaten them."

of the food, about the coldness of his dungeon, grumbling
and complaining, in order to have an excuse for speaking
louder, and wearying the patience of his jailer, who out of
kindness of heart had brought broth and white bread for his
prisoner.

He kept his word; twice a day he cast out, through the
barred aperture, the provisions his jailer brought him -- at
first gayly, then with deliberation, and at last with regret.
Nothing but the recollection of his oath gave him strength to
proceed. Hunger made viands once repugnant, now
acceptable; he held the plate in his hand for an hour at a time,
and gazed thoughtfully at the morsel of bad meat, of tainted
fish, of black and mouldy bread. It was the last yearning for
life contending with the resolution of despair; then his
dungeon seemed less sombre, his prospects less desperate.
He was still young -- he was only four or five and twenty -he had nearly fifty years to live. What unforseen events
might not open his prison door, and restore him to liberty?
Then he raised to his lips the repast that, like a voluntary
Tantalus, he refused himself; but he thought of his oath, and
he would not break it. He persisted until, at last, he had not
sufficient strength to rise and cast his supper out of the
loophole. The next morning he could not see or hear; the
jailer feared he was dangerously ill. Edmond hoped he was
dying.

Fortunately, he fancied that Dantes was delirious; and
placing the food on the rickety table, he withdrew. Edmond
listened, and the sound became more and more distinct.

Although weakened, the young man's brain instantly
responded to the idea that haunts all prisoners -- liberty! It
seemed to him that heaven had at length taken pity on him,
and had sent this noise to warn him on the very brink of the
abyss. Perhaps one of those beloved ones he had so often
thought of was thinking of him, and striving to diminish the
distance that separated them.

and his sight was clear; he went to a corner of his dungeon,
detached a stone, and with it knocked against the wall where
the sound came. He struck thrice. At the first blow the sound
ceased, as if by magic.

"There can be no doubt about it," thought he; "it is some
prisoner who is striving to obtain his freedom. Oh, if I were
only there to help him!" Suddenly another idea took
possession of his mind, so used to misfortune, that it was
scarcely capable of hope -- the idea that the noise was made
by workmen the governor had ordered to repair the
neighboring dungeon.
It was easy to ascertain this; but how could he risk the
question? It was easy to call his jailer's attention to the noise,
and watch his countenance as he listened; but might he not
by this means destroy hopes far more important than the
short-lived satisfaction of his own curiosity? Unfortunately,
Edmond's brain was still so feeble that he could not bend his
thoughts to anything in particular.

He saw but one means of restoring lucidity and clearness to
his judgment. He turned his eyes towards the soup which
Thus the day passed away. Edmond felt a sort of stupor the jailer had brought, rose, staggered towards it, raised the
creeping over him which brought with it a feeling almost of vessel to his lips, and drank off the contents with a feeling of
content; the gnawing pain at his stomach had ceased; his indescribable pleasure. He had often heard that shipwrecked
thirst had abated; when he closed his eyes he saw myriads of persons had died through having eagerly devoured too
lights dancing before them like the will-o'-the-wisps that much food. Edmond replaced on the table the bread he was
play about the marshes. It was the twilight of that about to devour, and returned to his couch -- he did not wish
to die. He soon felt that his ideas became again collected -mysterious country called Death!
he could think, and strengthen his thoughts by reasoning.
Suddenly, about nine o'clock in the evening, Edmond heard Then he said to himself, "I must put this to the test, but
a hollow sound in the wall against which he was lying.
without compromising anybody. If it is a workman, I need
So many loathsome animals inhabited the prison, that their but knock against the wall, and he will cease to work, in
noise did not, in general, awake him; but whether abstinence order to find out who is knocking, and why he does so; but
had quickened his faculties, or whether the noise was really as his occupation is sanctioned by the governor, he will soon
louder than usual, Edmond raised his head and listened. It resume it. If, on the contrary, it is a prisoner, the noise I
was a continual scratching, as if made by a huge claw, a make will alarm him, he will cease, and not begin again until
powerful tooth, or some iron instrument attacking the he thinks every one is asleep."
stones.
Edmond rose again, but this time his legs did not tremble,

No, no, doubtless he was deceived, and it was but one of

Edmond listened intently; an hour passed, two hours passed,
and no sound was heard from the wall -- all was silent there.
Full of hope, Edmond swallowed a few mouthfuls of bread
and water, and, thanks to the vigor of his constitution, found
49


CHAPTER 15


NUMBER 34 AND NUMBER 27

himself well-nigh recovered.
The day passed away in utter silence -- night came without
recurrence of the noise.
"It is a prisoner," said Edmond joyfully. The night passed in
perfect silence. Edmond did not close his eyes.
In the morning the jailer brought him fresh provisions -- he
had already devoured those of the previous day; he ate these
listening anxiously for the sound, walking round and round
his cell, shaking the iron bars of the loophole, restoring vigor
and agility to his limbs by exercise, and so preparing himself
for his future destiny. At intervals he listened to learn if the
noise had not begun again, and grew impatient at the
prudence of the prisoner, who did not guess he had been
disturbed by a captive as anxious for liberty as himself.
Three days passed -- seventy-two long tedious hours which
he counted off by minutes!

rock was not encountered, a passage twenty feet long and
two feet broad, might be formed.
The prisoner reproached himself with not having thus
employed the hours he had passed in vain hopes, prayer,
and despondency. During the six years that he had been
imprisoned, what might he not have accomplished?
In three days he had succeeded, with the utmost precaution,
in removing the cement, and exposing the stone-work. The
wall was built of rough stones, among which, to give
strength to the structure, blocks of hewn stone were at
intervals imbedded. It was one of these he had uncovered,
and which he must remove from its socket.
Dantes strove to do this with his nails, but they were too
weak. The fragments of the jug broke, and after an hour of
useless toil, he paused.

Was he to be thus stopped at the beginning, and was he to
wait inactive until his fellow workman had completed his
At length one evening, as the jailer was visiting him for the
task? Suddenly an idea occurred to him -- he smiled, and the
last time that night, Dantes, with his ear for the hundredth
perspiration dried on his forehead.
time at the wall, fancied he heard an almost imperceptible
movement among the stones. He moved away, walked up The jailer always brought Dantes' soup in an iron saucepan;
and down his cell to collect his thoughts, and then went back this saucepan contained soup for both prisoners, for Dantes
and listened.
had noticed that it was either quite full, or half empty,
according as the turnkey gave it to him or to his companion
The matter was no longer doubtful. Something was at work
first.
on the other side of the wall; the prisoner had discovered the
danger, and had substituted a lever for a chisel.
The handle of this saucepan was of iron; Dantes would have
given ten years of his life in exchange for it.
Encouraged by this discovery, Edmond determined to assist
the indefatigable laborer. He began by moving his bed, and The jailer was accustomed to pour the contents of the
looked around for anything with which he could pierce the saucepan into Dantes' plate, and Dantes, after eating his
wall, penetrate the moist cement, and displace a stone.
soup with a wooden spoon, washed the plate, which thus
served for every day. Now when evening came Dantes put
He saw nothing, he had no knife or sharp instrument, the
his plate on the ground near the door; the jailer, as he
window grating was of iron, but he had too often assured
entered, stepped on it and broke it.
himself of its solidity. All his furniture consisted of a bed, a
chair, a table, a pail, and a jug. The bed had iron clamps, but This time he could not blame Dantes. He was wrong to leave
they were screwed to the wood, and it would have required it there, but the jailer was wrong not to have looked before
a screw-driver to take them off. The table and chair had him.
nothing, the pail had once possessed a handle, but that had
The jailer, therefore, only grumbled. Then he looked about
been removed.
for something to pour the soup into; Dantes' entire dinner
Dantes had but one resource, which was to break the jug, service consisted of one plate -- there was no alternative.
and with one of the sharp fragments attack the wall. He let
"Leave the saucepan," said Dantes; "you can take it away
the jug fall on the floor, and it broke in pieces.
when you bring me my breakfast." This advice was to the
Dantes concealed two or three of the sharpest fragments in jailer's taste, as it spared him the necessity of making another
his bed, leaving the rest on the floor. The breaking of his jug trip. He left the saucepan.
was too natural an accident to excite suspicion. Edmond had
Dantes was beside himself with joy. He rapidly devoured his
all the night to work in, but in the darkness he could not do
food, and after waiting an hour, lest the jailer should change
much, and he soon felt that he was working against
his mind and return, he removed his bed, took the handle of
something very hard; he pushed back his bed, and waited
the saucepan, inserted the point between the hewn stone and
for day.
rough stones of the wall, and employed it as a lever. A slight
All night he heard the subterranean workman, who oscillation showed Dantes that all went well. At the end of
continued to mine his way. Day came, the jailer entered. an hour the stone was extricated from the wall, leaving a
Dantes told him that the jug had fallen from his hands while cavity a foot and a half in diameter.
he was drinking, and the jailer went grumblingly to fetch
Dantes carefully collected the plaster, carried it into the
another, without giving himself the trouble to remove the
corner of his cell, and covered it with earth. Then, wishing to
fragments of the broken one. He returned speedily, advised
make the best use of his time while he had the means of
the prisoner to be more careful, and departed.
labor, he continued to work without ceasing. At the dawn of
Dantes heard joyfully the key grate in the lock; he listened day he replaced the stone, pushed his bed against the wall,
until the sound of steps died away, and then, hastily and lay down. The breakfast consisted of a piece of bread;
displacing his bed, saw by the faint light that penetrated into the jailer entered and placed the bread on the table.
his cell, that he had labored uselessly the previous evening
"Well, don't you intend to bring me another plate?" said
in attacking the stone instead of removing the plaster that
Dantes.
surrounded it.
"No," replied the turnkey; "you destroy everything. First you
The damp had rendered it friable, and Dantes was able to
break your jug, then you make me break your plate; if all the
break it off -- in small morsels, it is true, but at the end of half
prisoners followed your example, the government would be
an hour he had scraped off a handful; a mathematician
ruined. I shall leave you the saucepan, and pour your soup
might have calculated that in two years, supposing that the
into that. So for the future I hope you will not be so
50

destructive."

on the throne, then?"

Dantes raised his eyes to heaven and clasped his hands
beneath the coverlet. He felt more gratitude for the
possession of this piece of iron than he had ever felt for
anything. He had noticed, however, that the prisoner on the
other side had ceased to labor; no matter, this was a greater
reason for proceeding -- if his neighbor would not come to
him, he would go to his neighbor. All day he toiled on
untiringly, and by the evening he had succeeded in
extracting ten handfuls of plaster and fragments of stone.
When the hour for his jailer's visit arrived, Dantes
straightened the handle of the saucepan as well as he could,
and placed it in its accustomed place. The turnkey poured
his ration of soup into it, together with the fish -- for thrice a
week the prisoners were deprived of meat. This would have
been a method of reckoning time, had not Dantes long
ceased to do so. Having poured out the soup, the turnkey
retired. Dantes wished to ascertain whether his neighbor had
really ceased to work. He listened -- all was silent, as it had
been for the last three days. Dantes sighed; it was evident
that his neighbor distrusted him. However, he toiled on all
the night without being discouraged; but after two or three
hours he encountered an obstacle. The iron made no
impression, but met with a smooth surface; Dantes touched
it, and found that it was a beam. This beam crossed, or rather
blocked up, the hole Dantes had made; it was necessary,
therefore, to dig above or under it. The unhappy young man
had not thought of this. "O my God, my God!" murmured he,
"I have so earnestly prayed to you, that I hoped my prayers
had been heard. After having deprived me of my liberty,
after having deprived me of death, after having recalled me
to existence, my God, have pity on me, and do not let me die
in despair!"

"He abdicated at Fontainebleau in 1814, and was sent to the
Island of Elba. But how long have you been here that you are
ignorant of all this?"

"Who talks of God and despair at the same time?" said a
voice that seemed to come from beneath the earth, and,
deadened by the distance, sounded hollow and sepulchral in
the young man's ears. Edmond's hair stood on end, and he
rose to his knees.

"And supposing you had succeeded?"

"Ah," said he, "I hear a human voice." Edmond had not
heard any one speak save his jailer for four or five years; and
a jailer is no man to a prisoner -- he is a living door, a barrier
of flesh and blood adding strength to restraints of oak and
iron.
"In the name of heaven," cried Dantes, "speak again, though
the sound of your voice terrifies me. Who are you?"

"Since 1811."
Dantes shuddered; this man had been four years longer than
himself in prison.
"Do not dig any more," said the voice; "only tell me how high
up is your excavation?"
"On a level with the floor."
"How is it concealed?"
"Behind my bed."
"Has your bed been moved since you have been a prisoner?"
"No."
"What does your chamber open on?"
"A corridor."
"And the corridor?"
"On a court."
"Alas!" murmured the voice.
"Oh, what is the matter?" cried Dantes.
"I have made a mistake owing to an error in my plans. I took
the wrong angle, and have come out fifteen feet from where
I intended. I took the wall you are mining for the outer wall
of the fortress."
"But then you would be close to the sea?"
"That is what I hoped."
"I should have thrown myself into the sea, gained one of the
islands near here -- the Isle de Daume or the Isle de Tiboulen
-- and then I should have been safe."
"Could you have swum so far?"
"Heaven would have given me strength; but now all is lost."
"All?"
"Yes; stop up your excavation carefully, do not work any
more, and wait until you hear from me."
"Tell me, at least, who you are?"

"Who are you?" said the voice.

"I am -- I am No. 27."

"An unhappy prisoner," replied Dantes, who made no
hesitation in answering.

"You mistrust me, then," said Dantes. Edmond fancied he
heard a bitter laugh resounding from the depths.

"Of what country?"

"Your profession?"

"Oh, I am a Christian," cried Dantes, guessing instinctively
that this man meant to abandon him. "I swear to you by him
who died for us that naught shall induce me to breathe one
syllable to my jailers; but I conjure you do not abandon me.
If you do, I swear to you, for I have got to the end of my
strength, that I will dash my brains out against the wall, and
you will have my death to reproach yourself with."

"A sailor."

"How old are you? Your voice is that of a young man."

"How long have you been here?"

"I do not know my age, for I have not counted the years I
have been here. All I do know is, that I was just nineteen
when I was arrested, the 28th of February, 1815."

"A Frenchman."
"Your name?"
"Edmond Dantes."

"Since the 28th of February, 1815."
"Your crime?"
"I am innocent."
"But of what are you accused?"
"Of having conspired to aid the emperor's return."
"What! For the emperor's return? -- the emperor is no longer

"Not quite twenty-six!" murmured the voice; "at that age he
cannot be a traitor."
"Oh, no, no," cried Dantes. "I swear to you again, rather than
betray you, I would allow myself to be hacked in pieces!"
"You have done well to speak to me, and ask for my
assistance, for I was about to form another plan, and leave
51


CHAPTER 15


NUMBER 34 AND NUMBER 27

you; but your age reassures me. I will not forget you. Wait."
"I must calculate our chances; I will give you the signal."

and stooped to examine the opening, he would kill him with
his water jug. He would be condemned to die, but he was
about to die of grief and despair when this miraculous noise
recalled him to life.

"But you will not leave me; you will come to me, or you will
let me come to you. We will escape, and if we cannot escape
we will talk; you of those whom you love, and I of those
whom I love. You must love somebody?"

The jailer came in the evening. Dantes was on his bed. It
seemed to him that thus he better guarded the unfinished
opening. Doubtless there was a strange expression in his
eyes, for the jailer said, "Come, are you going mad again?"

"How long?"

"No, I am alone in the world."

Dantes did not answer; he feared that the emotion of his
"Then you will love me. If you are young, I will be your voice would betray him. The jailer went away shaking his
comrade; if you are old, I will be your son. I have a father head. Night came; Dantes hoped that his neighbor would
who is seventy if he yet lives; I only love him and a young profit by the silence to address him, but he was mistaken.
girl called Mercedes. My father has not yet forgotten me, I The next morning, however, just as he removed his bed from
am sure, but God alone knows if she loves me still; I shall the wall, he heard three knocks; he threw himself on his
knees.
love you as I loved my father."
"It is well," returned the voice; "to-morrow."

"Is it you?" said he; "I am here."

These few words were uttered with an accent that left no
doubt of his sincerity; Dantes rose, dispersed the fragments
with the same precaution as before, and pushed his bed back
against the wall. He then gave himself up to his happiness.
He would no longer be alone. He was, perhaps, about to
regain his liberty; at the worst, he would have a companion,
and captivity that is shared is but half captivity. Plaints
made in common are almost prayers, and prayers where two
or three are gathered together invoke the mercy of heaven.

"Is your jailer gone?"
"Yes," said Dantes; "he will not return until the evening; so
that we have twelve hours before us."
"I can work, then?" said the voice.
"Oh, yes, yes; this instant, I entreat you."

In a moment that part of the floor on which Dantes was
resting his two hands, as he knelt with his head in the
opening, suddenly gave way; he drew back smartly, while a
All day Dantes walked up and down his cell. He sat down mass of stones and earth disappeared in a hole that opened
occasionally on his bed, pressing his hand on his heart. At beneath the aperture he himself had formed. Then from the
the slightest noise he bounded towards the door. Once or bottom of this passage, the depth of which it was impossible
twice the thought crossed his mind that he might be to measure, he saw appear, first the head, then the shoulders,
separated from this unknown, whom he loved already; and and lastly the body of a man, who sprang lightly into his cell.
then his mind was made up -- when the jailer moved his bed

52


Chapter 16

A Learned Italian

S

eizing in his arms the friend so long and ardently desired,
Dantes almost carried him towards the window, in order
to obtain a better view of his features by the aid of the
imperfect light that struggled through the grating.
He was a man of small stature, with hair blanched rather by
suffering and sorrow than by age. He had a deep-set,
penetrating eye, almost buried beneath the thick gray
eyebrow, and a long (and still black) beard reaching down to
his breast. His thin face, deeply furrowed by care, and the
bold outline of his strongly marked features, betokened a
man more accustomed to exercise his mental faculties than
his physical strength. Large drops of perspiration were now
standing on his brow, while the garments that hung about
him were so ragged that one could only guess at the pattern
upon which they had originally been fashioned.
The stranger might have numbered sixty or sixty-five years;
but a certain briskness and appearance of vigor in his
movements made it probable that he was aged more from
captivity than the course of time. He received the
enthusiastic greeting of his young acquaintance with evident
pleasure, as though his chilled affections were rekindled and
invigorated by his contact with one so warm and ardent. He
thanked him with grateful cordiality for his kindly welcome,
although he must at that moment have been suffering
bitterly to find another dungeon where he had fondly
reckoned on discovering a means of regaining his liberty.
"Let us first see," said he, "whether it is possible to remove
the traces of my entrance here -- our future tranquillity
depends upon our jailers being entirely ignorant of it."
Advancing to the opening, he stooped and raised the stone
easily in spite of its weight; then, fitting it into its place, he
said, --

"I do; that is about the distance that separates your chamber
from mine; only, unfortunately, I did not curve aright; for
want of the necessary geometrical instruments to calculate
my scale of proportion, instead of taking an ellipsis of forty
feet, I made it fifty. I expected, as I told you, to reach the
outer wall, pierce through it, and throw myself into the sea; I
have, however, kept along the corridor on which your
chamber opens, instead of going beneath it. My labor is all in
vain, for I find that the corridor looks into a courtyard filled
with soldiers."
"That's true," said Dantes; "but the corridor you speak of
only bounds one side of my cell; there are three others -- do
you know anything of their situation?"
"This one is built against the solid rock, and it would take ten
experienced miners, duly furnished with the requisite tools,
as many years to perforate it. This adjoins the lower part of
the governor's apartments, and were we to work our way
through, we should only get into some lock-up cellars,
where we must necessarily be recaptured. The fourth and
last side of your cell faces on -- faces on -- stop a minute, now
where does it face?"
The wall of which he spoke was the one in which was fixed
the loophole by which light was admitted to the chamber.
This loophole, which gradually diminished in size as it
approached the outside, to an opening through which a
child could not have passed, was, for better security,
furnished with three iron bars, so as to quiet all
apprehensions even in the mind of the most suspicious jailer
as to the possibility of a prisoner's escape. As the stranger
asked the question, he dragged the table beneath the
window.

"Climb up," said he to Dantes. The young man obeyed,
mounted on the table, and, divining the wishes of his
companion, placed his back securely against the wall and
held out both hands. The stranger, whom as yet Dantes
"Why," exclaimed Dantes, with astonishment, "do you
knew only by the number of his cell, sprang up with an
possess any?"
agility by no means to be expected in a person of his years,
"I made myself some; and with the exception of a file, I have and, light and steady on his feet as a cat or a lizard, climbed
all that are necessary, -- a chisel, pincers, and lever."
from the table to the outstretched hands of Dantes, and from
"Oh, how I should like to see these products of your industry them to his shoulders; then, bending double, for the ceiling
of the dungeon prevented him from holding himself erect,
and patience."
he managed to slip his head between the upper bars of the
"Well, in the first place, here is my chisel." So saying, he window, so as to be able to command a perfect view from
displayed a sharp strong blade, with a handle made of top to bottom.
beechwood.
An instant afterwards he hastily drew back his head, saying,
"And with what did you contrive to make that?" inquired "I thought so!" and sliding from the shoulders of Dantes as
Dantes.
dextrously as he had ascended, he nimbly leaped from the
"With one of the clamps of my bedstead; and this very tool table to the ground.
has sufficed me to hollow out the road by which I came "What was it that you thought?" asked the young man
hither, a distance of about fifty feet."
anxiously, in his turn descending from the table.
"You removed this stone very carelessly; but I suppose you
had no tools to aid you."

"Fifty feet!" responded Dantes, almost terrified.
"Do not speak so loud, young man -- don't speak so loud. It
frequently occurs in a state prison like this, that persons are
stationed outside the doors of the cells purposely to overhear
the conversation of the prisoners."
"But they believe I am shut up alone here."
"That makes no difference."
"And you say that you dug your way a distance of fifty feet
to get here?"

The elder prisoner pondered the matter. "Yes," said he at
length, "it is so. This side of your chamber looks out upon a
kind of open gallery, where patrols are continually passing,
and sentries keep watch day and night."
"Are you quite sure of that?"
"Certain. I saw the soldier's shape and the top of his musket;
that made me draw in my head so quickly, for I was fearful
he might also see me."
53


CHAPTER 16


A LEARNED ITALIAN

"Well?" inquired Dantes.
"You perceive then the utter impossibility of escaping
through your dungeon?"

was unable to complete his work. Italy seems fated to
misfortune." And the old man bowed his head.

Dantes could not understand a man risking his life for such
matters. Napoleon certainly he knew something of,
"Then," pursued the young man eagerly -inasmuch as he had seen and spoken with him; but of
"Then," answered the elder prisoner, "the will of God be Clement VII. and Alexander VI. he knew nothing.
done!" and as the old man slowly pronounced those words,
"Are you not," he asked, "the priest who here in the Chateau
an air of profound resignation spread itself over his
d'If is generally thought to be -- ill?"
careworn countenance. Dantes gazed on the man who could
thus philosophically resign hopes so long and ardently "Mad, you mean, don't you?"
nourished with an astonishment mingled with admiration.
"I did not like to say so," answered Dantes, smiling.
"Tell me, I entreat of you, who and what you are?" said he at
"Well, then," resumed Faria with a bitter smile, "let me
length; "never have I met with so remarkable a person as
answer your question in full, by acknowledging that I am the
yourself."
poor mad prisoner of the Chateau d'If, for many years
"Willingly," answered the stranger; "if, indeed, you feel any permitted to amuse the different visitors with what is said to
curiosity respecting one, now, alas, powerless to aid you in be my insanity; and, in all probability, I should be promoted
any way."
to the honor of making sport for the children, if such
innocent beings could be found in an abode devoted like this
"Say not so; you can console and support me by the strength
to suffering and despair."
of your own powerful mind. Pray let me know who you
really are?"
Dantes remained for a short time mute and motionless; at
length he said, -- "Then you abandon all hope of escape?"
The stranger smiled a melancholy smile. "Then listen," said
he. "l am the Abbe Faria, and have been imprisoned as you "I perceive its utter impossibility; and I consider it impious
know in this Chateau d'If since the year 1811; previously to to attempt that which the Almighty evidently does not
which I had been confined for three years in the fortress of approve."
Fenestrelle. In the year 1811 I was transferred to Piedmont in
"Nay, be not discouraged. Would it not be expecting too
France. It was at this period I learned that the destiny which
much to hope to succeed at your first attempt? Why not try
seemed subservient to every wish formed by Napoleon, had
to find an opening in another direction from that which has
bestowed on him a son, named king of Rome even in his
so unfortunately failed?"
cradle. I was very far then from expecting the change you
have just informed me of; namely, that four years afterwards, "Alas, it shows how little notion you can have of all it has
this colossus of power would be overthrown. Then who cost me to effect a purpose so unexpectedly frustrated, that
you talk of beginning over again. In the first place, I was four
reigns in France at this moment -- Napoleon II.?"
years making the tools I possess, and have been two years
"No, Louis XVIII."
scraping and digging out earth, hard as granite itself; then
"The brother of Louis XVII.! How inscrutable are the ways of what toil and fatigue has it not been to remove huge stones I
providence -- for what great and mysterious purpose has it should once have deemed impossible to loosen. Whole days
pleased heaven to abase the man once so elevated, and raise have I passed in these Titanic efforts, considering my labor
up him who was so abased?"
well repaid if, by night-time I had contrived to carry away a
square inch of this hard-bound cement, changed by ages into
Dantes, whole attention was riveted on a man who could
a substance unyielding as the stones themselves; then to
thus forget his own misfortunes while occupying himself
conceal the mass of earth and rubbish I dug up, I was
with the destinies of others.
compelled to break through a staircase, and throw the fruits
"Yes, yes," continued he, "'Twill be the same as it was in of my labor into the hollow part of it; but the well is now so
England. After Charles I., Cromwell; after Cromwell, Charles completely choked up, that I scarcely think it would be
II., and then James II., and then some son-in-law or relation, possible to add another handful of dust without leading to
some Prince of Orange, a stadtholder who becomes a king. discovery. Consider also that I fully believed I had
Then new concessions to the people, then a constitution, accomplished the end and aim of my undertaking, for which
then liberty. Ah, my friend!" said the abbe, turning towards I had so exactly husbanded my strength as to make it just
Dantes, and surveying him with the kindling gaze of a hold out to the termination of my enterprise; and now, at the
prophet, "you are young, you will see all this come to pass."
moment when I reckoned upon success, my hopes are
forever dashed from me. No, I repeat again, that nothing
"Probably, if ever I get out of prison!"
shall induce me to renew attempts evidently at variance with
"True," replied Faria, "we are prisoners; but I forget this the Almighty's pleasure."
sometimes, and there are even moments when my mental
vision transports me beyond these walls, and I fancy myself Dantes held down his head, that the other might not see how
joy at the thought of having a companion outweighed the
at liberty."
sympathy he felt for the failure of the abbe's plans.
"But wherefore are you here?"
The abbe sank upon Edmond's bed, while Edmond himself
"Because in 1807 I dreamed of the very plan Napoleon tried remained standing. Escape had never once occurred to him.
to realize in 1811; because, like Machiavelli, I desired to alter There are, indeed, some things which appear so impossible
the political face of Italy, and instead of allowing it to be split that the mind does not dwell on them for an instant. To
up into a quantity of petty principalities, each held by some undermine the ground for fifty feet -- to devote three years
weak or tyrannical ruler, I sought to form one large, compact, to a labor which, if successful, would conduct you to a
and powerful empire; and, lastly, because I fancied I had precipice overhanging the sea -- to plunge into the waves
found my Caesar Borgia in a crowned simpleton, who from the height of fifty, sixty, perhaps a hundred feet, at the
feigned to enter into my views only to betray me. It was the risk of being dashed to pieces against the rocks, should you
plan of Alexander VI. and Clement VII., but it will never have been fortunate enough to have escaped the fire of the
succeed now, for they attempted it fruitlessly, and Napoleon sentinels; and even, supposing all these perils past, then to
54

have to swim for your life a distance of at least three miles
ere you could reach the shore -- were difficulties so startling
and formidable that Dantes had never even dreamed of such
a scheme, resigning himself rather to death. But the sight of
an old man clinging to life with so desperate a courage, gave
a fresh turn to his ideas, and inspired him with new courage.
Another, older and less strong than he, had attempted what
he had not had sufficient resolution to undertake, and had
failed only because of an error in calculation. This same
person, with almost incredible patience and perseverance,
had contrived to provide himself with tools requisite for so
unparalleled an attempt. Another had done all this; why,
then, was it impossible to Dantes? Faria had dug his way
through fifty feet, Dantes would dig a hundred; Faria, at the
age of fifty, had devoted three years to the task; he, who was
but half as old, would sacrifice six; Faria, a priest and savant,
had not shrunk from the idea of risking his life by trying to
swim a distance of three miles to one of the islands -- Daume,
Rattonneau, or Lemaire; should a hardy sailer, an
experienced diver, like himself, shrink from a similar task;
should he, who had so often for mere amusement's sake
plunged to the bottom of the sea to fetch up the bright coral
branch, hesitate to entertain the same project? He could do it
in an hour, and how many times had he, for pure pastime,
continued in the water for more than twice as long! At once
Dantes resolved to follow the brave example of his energetic
companion, and to remember that what has once been done
may be done again.
After continuing some time in profound meditation, the
young man suddenly exclaimed, "I have found what you
were in search of!"
Faria started: "Have you, indeed?" cried he, raising his head
with quick anxiety; "pray, let me know what it is you have
discovered?"
"The corridor through which you have bored your way from
the cell you occupy here, extends in the same direction as the
outer gallery, does it not?"
"It does."
"And is not above fifteen feet from it?"
"About that."
"Well, then, I will tell you what we must do. We must pierce
through the corridor by forming a side opening about the
middle, as it were the top part of a cross. This time you will
lay your plans more accurately; we shall get out into the
gallery you have described; kill the sentinel who guards it,
and make our escape. All we require to insure success is
courage, and that you possess, and strength, which I am not
deficient in; as for patience, you have abundantly proved
yours -- you shall now see me prove mine."
"One instant, my dear friend," replied the abbe; "it is clear
you do not understand the nature of the courage with which
I am endowed, and what use I intend making of my strength.
As for patience, I consider that I have abundantly exercised
that in beginning every morning the task of the night before,
and every night renewing the task of the day. But then,
young man (and I pray of you to give me your full attention),
then I thought I could not be doing anything displeasing to
the Almighty in trying to set an innocent being at liberty -one who had committed no offence, and merited not
condemnation."

have thought it no sin to bore through a wall, or destroy a
staircase; but I cannot so easily persuade myself to pierce a
heart or take away a life." A slight movement of surprise
escaped Dantes.
"Is it possible," said he, "that where your liberty is at stake
you can allow any such scruple to deter you from obtaining
it?"
"Tell me," replied Faria, "what has hindered you from
knocking down your jailer with a piece of wood torn from
your bedstead, dressing yourself in his clothes, and
endeavoring to escape?"
"Simply the fact that the idea never occurred to me,"
answered Dantes.
"Because," said the old man, "the natural repugnance to the
commission of such a crime prevented you from thinking of
it; and so it ever is because in simple and allowable things
our natural instincts keep us from deviating from the strict
line of duty. The tiger, whose nature teaches him to delight
in shedding blood, needs but the sense of smell to show him
when his prey is within his reach, and by following this
instinct he is enabled to measure the leap necessary to
permit him to spring on his victim; but man, on the contrary,
loathes the idea of blood -- it is not alone that the laws of
social life inspire him with a shrinking dread of taking life;
his natural construction and physiological formation" -Dantes was confused and silent at this explanation of the
thoughts which had unconsciously been working in his
mind, or rather soul; for there are two distinct sorts of ideas,
those that proceed from the head and those that emanate
from the heart.
"Since my imprisonment," said Faria, "I have thought over all
the most celebrated cases of escape on record. They have
rarely been successful. Those that have been crowned with
full success have been long meditated upon, and carefully
arranged; such, for instance, as the escape of the Duc de
Beaufort from the Chateau de Vincennes, that of the Abbe
Dubuquoi from For l'Eveque; of Latude from the Bastille.
Then there are those for which chance sometimes affords
opportunity, and those are the best of all. Let us, therefore,
wait patiently for some favorable moment, and when it
presents itself, profit by it."
"Ah," said Dantes, "you might well endure the tedious delay;
you were constantly employed in the task you set yourself,
and when weary with toil, you had your hopes to refresh
and encourage you."
"I assure you," replied the old man, "I did not turn to that
source for recreation or support."
"What did you do then?"
"I wrote or studied."
"Were you then permitted the use of pens, ink, and paper?"
"Oh, no," answered the abbe; "I had none but what I made
for myself."
"You made paper, pens and ink?"
"Yes."
Dantes gazed with admiration, but he had some difficulty in
believing. Faria saw this.

"When you pay me a visit in my cell, my young friend," said
"And have your notions changed?" asked Dantes with much he, "I will show you an entire work, the fruits of the thoughts
surprise; "do you think yourself more guilty in making the and reflections of my whole life; many of them meditated
over in the shades of the Coloseum at Rome, at the foot of St.
attempt since you have encountered me?"
Mark's column at Venice, and on the borders of the Arno at
"No; neither do I wish to incur guilt. Hitherto I have fancied
Florence, little imagining at the time that they would be
myself merely waging war against circumstances, not men. I
arranged in order within the walls of the Chateau d'If. The
55


CHAPTER 16


A LEARNED ITALIAN

work I speak of is called `A Treatise on the Possibility of a although I believe there are nearly one hundred thousand in
General Monarchy in Italy,' and will make one large quarto the dictionaries. I cannot hope to be very fluent, but I
volume."
certainly should have no difficulty in explaining my wants
and wishes; and that would be quite as much as I should
"And on what have you written all this?"
ever require."
"On two of my shirts. I invented a preparation that makes
Stronger grew the wonder of Dantes, who almost fancied he
linen as smooth and as easy to write on as parchment."
had to do with one gifted with supernatural powers; still
"You are, then, a chemist?"
hoping to find some imperfection which might bring him
"Somewhat; I know Lavoisier, and was the intimate friend of down to a level with human beings, he added, "Then if you
were not furnished with pens, how did you manage to write
Cabanis."
the work you speak of?"
"But for such a work you must have needed books -- had
"I made myself some excellent ones, which would be
you any?"
universally preferred to all others if once known. You are
"I had nearly five thousand volumes in my library at Rome; aware what huge whitings are served to us on maigre days.
but after reading them over many times, I found out that Well, I selected the cartilages of the heads of these fishes, and
with one hundred and fifty well-chosen books a man you can scarcely imagine the delight with which I welcomed
possesses, if not a complete summary of all human the arrival of each Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday, as
knowledge, at least all that a man need really know. I affording me the means of increasing my stock of pens; for I
devoted three years of my life to reading and studying these will freely confess that my historical labors have been my
one hundred and fifty volumes, till I knew them nearly by greatest solace and relief. While retracing the past, I forget
heart; so that since I have been in prison, a very slight effort the present; and traversing at will the path of history I cease
of memory has enabled me to recall their contents as readily to remember that I am myself a prisoner."
as though the pages were open before me. I could recite you
the whole of Thucydides, Xenophon, Plutarch, Titus Livius, "But the ink," said Dantes; "of what did you make your ink?"
Tacitus, Strada, Jornandes, Dante, Montaigne, Shakspeare, "There was formerly a fireplace in my dungeon," replied
Spinoza, Machiavelli, and Bossuet. I name only the most Faria, "but it was closed up long ere I became an occupant of
important."
this prison. Still, it must have been many years in use, for it
"You are, doubtless, acquainted with a variety of languages, was thickly covered with a coating of soot; this soot I
dissolved in a portion of the wine brought to me every
so as to have been able to read all these?"
Sunday, and I assure you a better ink cannot be desired. For
"Yes, I speak five of the modern tongues -- that is to say, very important notes, for which closer attention is required, I
German, French, Italian, English, and Spanish; by the aid of pricked one of my fingers, and wrote with my own blood."
ancient Greek I learned modern Greek -- I don't speak it so
well as I could wish, but I am still trying to improve myself." "And when," asked Dantes, "may I see all this?"
"Improve yourself!" repeated Dantes; "why, how can you "Whenever you please," replied the abbe.
manage to do so?"

"Oh, then let it be directly!" exclaimed the young man.

"Why, I made a vocabulary of the words I knew; turned,
returned, and arranged them, so as to enable me to express
my thoughts through their medium. I know nearly one
thousand words, which is all that is absolutely necessary,

"Follow me, then," said the abbe, as he re-entered the
subterranean passage, in which he soon disappeared,
followed by Dantes.

56


Chapter 17

The Abbe's Chamber

A

fter having passed with tolerable ease through the
subterranean passage, which, however, did not admit
of their holding themselves erect, the two friends reached the
further end of the corridor, into which the abbe's cell opened;
from that point the passage became much narrower, and
barely permitted one to creep through on hands and knees.
The floor of the abbe's cell was paved, and it had been by
raising one of the stones in the most obscure corner that
Faria had to been able to commence the laborious task of
which Dantes had witnessed the completion.
As he entered the chamber of his friend, Dantes cast around
one eager and searching glance in quest of the expected
marvels, but nothing more than common met his view.

"I see," answered Dantes. "Now let me behold the curious
pens with which you have written your work."
"Look!" said Faria, showing to the young man a slender stick
about six inches long, and much resembling the size of the
handle of a fine painting-brush, to the end of which was tied,
by a piece of thread, one of those cartilages of which the
abbe had before spoken to Dantes; it was pointed, and
divided at the nib like an ordinary pen. Dantes examined it
with intense admiration, then looked around to see the
instrument with which it had been shaped so correctly into
form.

"Ah, yes," said Faria; "the penknife. That's my masterpiece. I
made it, as well as this larger knife, out of an old iron
"It is well," said the abbe; "we have some hours before us -- it candlestick." The penknife was sharp and keen as a razor; as
is now just a quarter past twelve o'clock." Instinctively for the other knife, it would serve a double purpose, and
Dantes turned round to observe by what watch or clock the with it one could cut and thrust.
abbe had been able so accurately to specify the hour.
Dantes examined the various articles shown to him with the
"Look at this ray of light which enters by my window," said same attention that he had bestowed on the curiosities and
the abbe, "and then observe the lines traced on the wall. Well, strange tools exhibited in the shops at Marseilles as the
by means of these lines, which are in accordance with the works of the savages in the South Seas from whence they
double motion of the earth, and the ellipse it describes round had been brought by the different trading vessels.
the sun, I am enabled to ascertain the precise hour with more
"As for the ink," said Faria, "I told you how I managed to
minuteness than if I possessed a watch; for that might be
obtain that -- and I only just make it from time to time, as I
broken or deranged in its movements, while the sun and
require it."
earth never vary in their appointed paths."
"One thing still puzzles me," observed Dantes, "and that is
This last explanation was wholly lost upon Dantes, who had
how you managed to do all this by daylight?"
always imagined, from seeing the sun rise from behind the
mountains and set in the Mediterranean, that it moved, and "I worked at night also," replied Faria.
not the earth. A double movement of the globe he inhabited, "Night! -- why, for heaven's sake, are your eyes like cats',
and of which he could feel nothing, appeared to him that you can see to work in the dark?"
perfectly impossible. Each word that fell from his
companion's lips seemed fraught with the mysteries of "Indeed they are not; but God has supplied man with the
science, as worthy of digging out as the gold and diamonds intelligence that enables him to overcome the limitations of
in the mines of Guzerat and Golconda, which he could just natural conditions. I furnished myself with a light."
recollect having visited during a voyage made in his earliest "You did? Pray tell me how."
youth.
"I separated the fat from the meat served to me, melted it,
"Come," said he to the abbe, "I am anxious to see your and so made oil -- here is my lamp." So saying, the abbe
treasures."
exhibited a sort of torch very similar to those used in public
The abbe smiled, and, proceeding to the disused fireplace, illuminations.
raised, by the help of his chisel, a long stone, which had "But light?"
doubtless been the hearth, beneath which was a cavity of
"Here are two flints and a piece of burnt linen."
considerable depth, serving as a safe depository of the
"And matches?"
articles mentioned to Dantes.
"I pretended that I had a disorder of the skin, and asked for a
little sulphur, which was readily supplied." Dantes laid the
"Oh, your great work on the monarchy of Italy!"
different things he had been looking at on the table, and
Faria then drew forth from his hiding-place three or four stood with his head drooping on his breast, as though
rolls of linen, laid one over the other, like folds of papyrus. overwhelmed by the perseverance and strength of Faria's
These rolls consisted of slips of cloth about four inches wide mind.
and eighteen long; they were all carefully numbered and
"You have not seen all yet," continued Faria, "for I did not
closely covered with writing, so legible that Dantes could
think it wise to trust all my treasures in the same
easily read it, as well as make out the sense -- it being in
hiding-place. Let us shut this one up." They put the stone
Italian, a language he, as a Provencal, perfectly understood.
back in its place; the abbe sprinkled a little dust over it to
"There," said he, "there is the work complete. I wrote the conceal the traces of its having been removed, rubbed his
word finis at the end of the sixty-eighth strip about a week foot well on it to make it assume the same appearance as the
ago. I have torn up two of my shirts, and as many other, and then, going towards his bed, he removed it from
handkerchiefs as I was master of, to complete the precious the spot it stood in. Behind the head of the bed, and
pages. Should I ever get out of prison and find in all Italy a concealed by a stone fitting in so closely as to defy all
printer courageous enough to publish what I have composed, suspicion, was a hollow space, and in this space a ladder of
my literary reputation is forever secured."
cords between twenty-five and thirty feet in length.
57
"What do you wish to see first?" asked the abbe.


CHAPTER 17


THE ABBE'S CHAMBER

Dantes closely and eagerly examined it; he found it firm,
solid, and compact enough to bear any weight.

undeserved misfortune. I would fain fix the source of it on
man that I may no longer vent reproaches upon heaven."

"Who supplied you with the materials for making this
wonderful work?"

"Then you profess ignorance of the crime with which you are
charged?"

"I tore up several of my shirts, and ripped out the seams in
the sheets of my bed, during my three years' imprisonment
at Fenestrelle; and when I was removed to the Chateau d'If, I
managed to bring the ravellings with me, so that I have been
able to finish my work here."

"I do, indeed; and this I swear by the two beings most dear
to me upon earth, -- my father and Mercedes."

"And was it not discovered that your sheets were
unhemmed?"
"Oh, no, for when I had taken out the thread I required, I
hemmed the edges over again."
"With what?"
"With this needle," said the abbe, as, opening his ragged
vestments, he showed Dantes a long, sharp fish-bone, with a
small perforated eye for the thread, a small portion of which
still remained in it. "I once thought," continued Faria, "of
removing these iron bars, and letting myself down from the
window, which, as you see, is somewhat wider than yours,
although I should have enlarged it still more preparatory to
my flight; however, I discovered that I should merely have
dropped into a sort of inner court, and I therefore renounced
the project altogether as too full of risk and danger.
Nevertheless, I carefully preserved my ladder against one of
those unforeseen opportunities of which I spoke just now,
and which sudden chance frequently brings about." While
affecting to be deeply engaged in examining the ladder, the
mind of Dantes was, in fact, busily occupied by the idea that
a person so intelligent, ingenious, and clear-sighted as the
abbe might probably be able to solve the dark mystery of his
own misfortunes, where he himself could see nothing.
"What are you thinking of?" asked the abbe smilingly,
imputing the deep abstraction in which his visitor was
plunged to the excess of his awe and wonder.
"I was reflecting, in the first place," replied Dantes, "upon the
enormous degree of intelligence and ability you must have
employed to reach the high perfection to which you have
attained. What would you not have accomplished if you had
been free?"

"Come," said the abbe, closing his hiding-place, and pushing
the bed back to its original situation, "let me hear your
story."
Dantes obeyed, and commenced what he called his history,
but which consisted only of the account of a voyage to India,
and two or three voyages to the Levant until he arrived at
the recital of his last cruise, with the death of Captain Leclere,
and the receipt of a packet to be delivered by himself to the
grand marshal; his interview with that personage, and his
receiving, in place of the packet brought, a letter addressed
to a Monsieur Noirtier -- his arrival at Marseilles, and
interview with his father -- his affection for Mercedes, and
their nuptual feast -- his arrest and subsequent examination,
his temporary detention at the Palais de Justice, and his final
imprisonment in the Chateau d'If. From this point
everything was a blank to Dantes -- he knew nothing more,
not even the length of time he had been imprisoned. His
recital finished, the abbe reflected long and earnestly.
"There is," said he, at the end of his meditations, "a clever
maxim, which bears upon what I was saying to you some
little while ago, and that is, that unless wicked ideas take
root in a naturally depraved mind, human nature, in a right
and wholesome state, revolts at crime. Still, from an artificial
civilization have originated wants, vices, and false tastes,
which occasionally become so powerful as to stifle within us
all good feelings, and ultimately to lead us into guilt and
wickedness. From this view of things, then, comes the axiom
that if you visit to discover the author of any bad action, seek
first to discover the person to whom the perpetration of that
bad action could be in any way advantageous. Now, to
apply it in your case, -- to whom could your disappearance
have been serviceable?"
"To no one, by heaven! I was a very insignificant person."

"Do not speak thus, for your reply evinces neither logic nor
philosophy; everything is relative, my dear young friend,
"Possibly nothing at all; the overflow of my brain would from the king who stands in the way of his successor, to the
probably, in a state of freedom, have evaporated in a employee who keeps his rival out of a place. Now, in the
thousand follies; misfortune is needed to bring to light the event of the king's death, his successor inherits a crown, -treasures of the human intellect. Compression is needed to when the employee dies, the supernumerary steps into his
explode gunpowder. Captivity has brought my mental shoes, and receives his salary of twelve thousand livres. Well,
faculties to a focus; and you are well aware that from the these twelve thousand livres are his civil list, and are as
collision of clouds electricity is produced -- from electricity, essential to him as the twelve millions of a king. Every one,
lightning, from lightning, illumination."
from the highest to the lowest degree, has his place on the
"No," replied Dantes. "I know nothing. Some of your words social ladder, and is beset by stormy passions and conflicting
are to me quite empty of meaning. You must be blessed interests, as in Descartes' theory of pressure and impulsion.
But these forces increase as we go higher, so that we have a
indeed to possess the knowledge you have."
spiral which in defiance of reason rests upon the apex and
The abbe smiled. "Well," said he, "but you had another not on the base. Now let us return to your particular world.
subject for your thoughts; did you not say so just now?"
You say you were on the point of being made captain of the
Pharaon?"
"I did!"
"You have told me as yet but one of them -- let me hear the
other."
"It was this, -- that while you had related to me all the
particulars of your past life, you were perfectly
unacquainted with mine."

"Yes."
"And about to become the husband of a young and lovely
girl?"
"Yes."

"Now, could any one have had any interest in preventing the
"Your life, my young friend, has not been of sufficient length accomplishment of these two things? But let us first settle the
to admit of your having passed through any very important question as to its being the interest of any one to hinder you
events."
from being captain of the Pharaon. What say you?"
"It has been long enough to inflict on me a great and
58

"I cannot believe such was the case. I was generally liked on
board, and had the sailors possessed the right of selecting a
captain themselves, I feel convinced their choice would have
fallen on me. There was only one person among the crew
who had any feeling of ill-will towards me. I had quarelled
with him some time previously, and had even challenged
him to fight me; but he refused."
"Now we are getting on. And what was this man's name?"
"Danglars."

Murat with a packet for the usurper; again, by the usurper,
with a letter for the Bonapartist Club in Paris. This proof of
his guilt may be procured by his immediate arrest, as the
letter will be found either about his person, at his father's
residence, or in his cabin on board the Pharaon.'" The abbe
shrugged his shoulders. "The thing is clear as day," said he;
"and you must have had a very confiding nature, as well as a
good heart, not to have suspected the origin of the whole
affair."

"What rank did he hold on board?"

"Do you really think so? Ah, that would indeed be
infamous."

"He was supercargo."

"How did Danglars usually write?"

"And had you been captain, should you have retained him in
his employment?"

"In a handsome, running hand."

"Not if the choice had remained with me, for I had
frequently observed inaccuracies in his accounts."

"Backhanded." Again the abbe smiled. "Disguised."

"Good again! Now then, tell me, was any person present
during your last conversation with Captain Leclere?"
"No; we were quite alone."
"Could your conversation have been overheard by any one?"
"It might, for the cabin door was open -- and -- stay; now I
recollect, -- Danglars himself passed by just as Captain
Leclere was giving me the packet for the grand marshal."

"And how was the anonymous letter written?"
"It was very boldly written, if disguised."
"Stop a bit," said the abbe, taking up what he called his pen,
and, after dipping it into the ink, he wrote on a piece of
prepared linen, with his left hand, the first two or three
words of the accusation. Dantes drew back, and gazed on the
abbe with a sensation almost amounting to terror.
"How very astonishing!" cried he at length. "Why your
writing exactly resembles that of the accusation."

"That's better," cried the abbe; "now we are on the right scent. "Simply because that accusation had been written with the
Did you take anybody with you when you put into the port left hand; and I have noticed that" -of Elba?"
"What?"
"Nobody."
"That while the writing of different persons done with the
"Somebody there received your packet, and gave you a letter right hand varies, that performed with the left hand is
in place of it, I think?"
invariably uniform."
"Yes; the grand marshal did."

"You have evidently seen and observed everything."

"And what did you do with that letter?"

"Let us proceed."

"Put it into my portfolio."

"Oh, yes, yes!"

"You had your portfolio with you, then? Now, how could a
sailor find room in his pocket for a portfolio large enough to
contain an official letter?"

"Now as regards the second question."

"You are right; it was left on board."
"Then it was not till your return to the ship that you put the
letter in the portfolio?"
"No."
"And what did you do with this same letter while returning
from Porto-Ferrajo to the vessel?"
"I carried it in my hand."

"I am listening."
"Was there any person whose interest it was to prevent your
marriage with Mercedes?"
"Yes; a young man who loved her."
"And his name was" -"Fernand."
"That is a Spanish name, I think?"
"He was a Catalan."

"So that when you went on board the Pharaon, everybody "You imagine him capable of writing the letter?"
could see that you held a letter in your hand?"
"Oh, no; he would more likely have got rid of me by sticking
"Yes."
a knife into me."
"Danglars, as well as the rest?"
"Danglars, as well as others."
"Now, listen to me, and try to recall every circumstance
attending your arrest. Do you recollect the words in which
the information against you was formulated?"
"Oh yes, I read it over three times, and the words sank
deeply into my memory."

"That is in strict accordance with the Spanish character; an
assassination they will unhesitatingly commit, but an act of
cowardice, never."
"Besides," said Dantes, "the various circumstances
mentioned in the letter were wholly unknown to him."
"You had never spoken of them yourself to any one?"
"To no one."

"Repeat it to me."

"Not even to your mistress?"

Dantes paused a moment, then said, "This is it, word for
word: `The king's attorney is informed by a friend to the
throne and religion, that one Edmond Dantes, mate on board
the Pharaon, this day arrived from Smyrna, after having
touched at Naples and Porto-Ferrajo, has been intrusted by

"No, not even to my betrothed."
"Then it is Danglars."
"I feel quite sure of it now."
"Wait a little. Pray, was Danglars acquainted with
59


CHAPTER 17


THE ABBE'S CHAMBER

Fernand?"

"What? the accusation?"

"No -- yes, he was. Now I recollect" --

"No; the letter."

"What?"

"Are you sure?"

"To have seen them both sitting at table together under an
arbor at Pere Pamphile's the evening before the day fixed for
my wedding. They were in earnest conversation. Danglars
was joking in a friendly way, but Fernand looked pale and
agitated."

"I saw it done."

"Were they alone?"
"There was a third person with them whom I knew perfectly
well, and who had, in all probability made their
acquaintance; he was a tailor named Caderousse, but he was
very drunk. Stay! -- stay! -- How strange that it should not
have occurred to me before! Now I remember quite well,
that on the table round which they were sitting were pens,
ink, and paper. Oh, the heartless, treacherous scoundrels!"
exclaimed Dantes, pressing his hand to his throbbing brows.

"That alters the case. This man might, after all, be a greater
scoundrel than you have thought possible."
"Upon my word," said Dantes, "you make me shudder. Is the
world filled with tigers and crocodiles?"
"Yes; and remember that two-legged tigers and crocodiles
are more dangerous than the others."
"Never mind; let us go on."
"With all my heart! You tell me he burned the letter?"
"He did; saying at the same time, `You see I thus destroy the
only proof existing against you.'"
"This action is somewhat too sublime to be natural."

"Is there anything else I can assist you in discovering, "You think so?"
besides the villany of your friends?" inquired the abbe with a
"I am sure of it. To whom was this letter addressed?"
laugh.
"To M. Noirtier, No. 13 Coq-Heron, Paris."
"Yes, yes," replied Dantes eagerly; "I would beg of you, who
see so completely to the depths of things, and to whom the "Now can you conceive of any interest that your heroic
greatest mystery seems but an easy riddle, to explain to me deputy could possibly have had in the destruction of that
how it was that I underwent no second examination, was letter?"
never brought to trial, and, above all, was condemned "Why, it is not altogether impossible he might have had, for
without ever having had sentence passed on me?"
he made me promise several times never to speak of that
"That is altogether a different and more serious matter,"
responded the abbe. "The ways of justice are frequently too
dark and mysterious to be easily penetrated. All we have
hitherto done in the matter has been child's play. If you wish
me to enter upon the more difficult part of the business, you
must assist me by the most minute information on every
point."
"Pray ask me whatever questions you please; for, in good
truth, you see more clearly into my life than I do myself."
"In the first place, then, who examined you, -- the king's
attorney, his deputy, or a magistrate?"

letter to any one, assuring me he so advised me for my own
interest; and, more than this, he insisted on my taking a
solemn oath never to utter the name mentioned in the
address."
"Noirtier!" repeated the abbe; "Noirtier! -- I knew a person of
that name at the court of the Queen of Etruria, -- a Noirtier,
who had been a Girondin during the Revolution! What was
your deputy called?"
"De Villefort!" The abbe burst into a fit of laughter, while
Dantes gazed on him in utter astonishment.
"What ails you?" said he at length.

"The deputy."

"Do you see that ray of sunlight?"

"Was he young or old?"

"I do."

"About six or seven and twenty years of age, I should say."

"Well, the whole thing is more clear to me than that sunbeam
is to you. Poor fellow! poor young man! And you tell me this
magistrate expressed great sympathy and commiseration for
you?"

"So," answered the abbe. "Old enough to be ambitions, but
too young to be corrupt. And how did he treat you?"
"With more of mildness than severity."
"Did you tell him your whole story?"
"I did."
"And did his conduct change at all in the course of your
examination?"
"He did appear much disturbed when he read the letter that
had brought me into this scrape. He seemed quite overcome
by my misfortune."
"By your misfortune?"
"Yes."
"Then you feel quite sure that it was your misfortune he
deplored?"
"He gave me one great proof of his sympathy, at any rate."
"And that?"
"He burnt the sole evidence that could at all have criminated
me."
60

"He did."
"And the worthy man destroyed your compromising letter?"
"Yes."
"And then made you swear never to utter the name of
Noirtier?"
"Yes."
"Why, you poor short-sighted simpleton, can you not guess
who this Noirtier was, whose very name he was so careful to
keep concealed? Noirtier was his father."
Had a thunderbolt fallen at the feet of Dantes, or hell opened
its yawning gulf before him, he could not have been more
completely transfixed with horror than he was at the sound
of these unexpected words. Starting up, he clasped his hands
around his head as though to prevent his very brain from
bursting, and exclaimed, "His father! His father!"
"Yes, his father," replied the abbe; "his right name was
Noirtier de Villefort." At this instant a bright light shot

through the mind of Dantes, and cleared up all that had been
dark and obscure before. The change that had come over
Villefort during the examination, the destruction of the letter,
the exacted promise, the almost supplicating tones of the
magistrate, who seemed rather to implore mercy than to
pronounce punishment, -- all returned with a stunning force
to his memory. He cried out, and staggered against the wall
like a drunken man, then he hurried to the opening that led
from the abbe's cell to his own, and said, "I must be alone, to
think over all this."

much as I do myself. Now, it will scarcely require two years
for me to communicate to you the stock of learning I
possess."

When he regained his dungeon, he threw himself on his bed,
where the turnkey found him in the evening visit, sitting
with fixed gaze and contracted features, dumb and
motionless as a statue. During these hours of profound
meditation, which to him had seemed only minutes, he had
formed a fearful resolution, and bound himself to its
fulfilment by a solemn oath.

"Philosophy cannot be taught; it is the application of the
sciences to truth; it is like the golden cloud in which the
Messiah went up into heaven."

Dantes was at length roused from his revery by the voice of
Faria, who, having also been visited by his jailer, had come
to invite his fellow-sufferer to share his supper. The
reputation of being out of his mind, though harmlessly and
even amusingly so, had procured for the abbe unusual
privileges. He was supplied with bread of a finer, whiter
quality than the usual prison fare, and even regaled each
Sunday with a small quantity of wine. Now this was a
Sunday, and the abbe had come to ask his young companion
to share the luxuries with him. Dantes followed; his features
were no longer contracted, and now wore their usual
expression, but there was that in his whole appearance that
bespoke one who had come to a fixed and desperate resolve.
Faria bent on him his penetrating eye: "I regret now," said he,
"having helped you in your late inquiries, or having given
you the information I did."
"Why so?" inquired Dantes.
"Because it has instilled a new passion in your heart -- that of
vengeance."
Dantes smiled. "Let us talk of something else," said he.
Again the abbe looked at him, then mournfully shook his
head; but in accordance with Dantes' request, he began to
speak of other matters. The elder prisoner was one of those
persons whose conversation, like that of all who have
experienced many trials, contained many useful and
important hints as well as sound information; but it was
never egotistical, for the unfortunate man never alluded to
his own sorrows. Dantes listened with admiring attention to
all he said; some of his remarks corresponded with what he
already knew, or applied to the sort of knowledge his
nautical life had enabled him to acquire. A part of the good
abbe's words, however, were wholly incomprehensible to
him; but, like the aurora which guides the navigator in
northern latitudes, opened new vistas to the inquiring mind
of the listener, and gave fantastic glimpses of new horizons,
enabling him justly to estimate the delight an intellectual
mind would have in following one so richly gifted as Faria
along the heights of truth, where he was so much at home.
"You must teach me a small part of what you know," said
Dantes, "if only to prevent your growing weary of me. I can
well believe that so learned a person as yourself would
prefer absolute solitude to being tormented with the
company of one as ignorant and uninformed as myself. If
you will only agree to my request, I promise you never to
mention another word about escaping." The abbe smiled.
"Alas, my boy," said he, "human knowledge is confined
within very narrow limits; and when I have taught you
mathematics, physics, history, and the three or four modern
languages with which I am acquainted, you will know as

"Two years!" exclaimed Dantes; "do you really believe I can
acquire all these things in so short a time?"
"Not their application, certainly, but their principles you
may; to learn is not to know; there are the learners and the
learned. Memory makes the one, philosophy the other."
"But cannot one learn philosophy?"

"Well, then," said Dantes, "What shall you teach me first? I
am in a hurry to begin. I want to learn."
"Everything," said the abbe. And that very evening the
prisoners sketched a plan of education, to be entered upon
the following day. Dantes possessed a prodigious memory,
combined with an astonishing quickness and readiness of
conception; the mathematical turn of his mind rendered him
apt at all kinds of calculation, while his naturally poetical
feelings threw a light and pleasing veil over the dry reality of
arithmetical computation, or the rigid severity of geometry.
He already knew Italian, and had also picked up a little of
the Romaic dialect during voyages to the East; and by the aid
of these two languages he easily comprehended the
construction of all the others, so that at the end of six months
he began to speak Spanish, English, and German. In strict
accordance with the promise made to the abbe, Dantes spoke
no more of escape. Perhaps the delight his studies afforded
him left no room for such thoughts; perhaps the recollection
that he had pledged his word (on which his sense of honor
was keen) kept him from referring in any way to the
possibilities of flight. Days, even months, passed by
unheeded in one rapid and instructive course. At the end of
a year Dantes was a new man. Dantes observed, however,
that Faria, in spite of the relief his society afforded, daily
grew sadder; one thought seemed incessantly to harass and
distract his mind. Sometimes he would fall into long reveries,
sigh heavily and involuntarily, then suddenly rise, and, with
folded arms, begin pacing the confined space of his dungeon.
One day he stopped all at once, and exclaimed, "Ah, if there
were no sentinel!"
"There shall not be one a minute longer than you please,"
said Dantes, who had followed the working of his thoughts
as accurately as though his brain were enclosed in crystal so
clear as to display its minutest operations.
"I have already told you," answered the abbe, "that I loathe
the idea of shedding blood."
"And yet the murder, if you choose to call it so, would be
simply a measure of self-preservation."
"No matter! I could never agree to it."
"Still, you have thought of it?"
"Incessantly, alas!" cried the abbe.
"And you have discovered a means of regaining our freedom,
have you not?" asked Dantes eagerly.
"I have; if it were only possible to place a deaf and blind
sentinel in the gallery beyond us."
"He shall be both blind and deaf," replied the young man,
with an air of determination that made his companion
shudder.
"No, no," cried the abbe; "impossible!" Dantes endeavored to
renew the subject; the abbe shook his head in token of
disapproval, and refused to make any further response.
61


CHAPTER 17


THE ABBE'S CHAMBER

Three months passed away.
"Are you strong?" the abbe asked one day of Dantes. The
young man, in reply, took up the chisel, bent it into the form
of a horseshoe, and then as readily straightened it.
"And will you engage not to do any harm to the sentry,
except as a last resort?"
"I promise on my honor."
"Then," said the abbe, "we may hope to put our design into
execution."
"And how long shall we be in accomplishing the necessary
work?"
"At least a year."
"And shall we begin at once?"
"At once."
"We have lost a year to no purpose!" cried Dantes.
"Do you consider the last twelve months to have been
wasted?" asked the abbe.
"Forgive me!" cried Edmond, blushing deeply.
"Tut, tut!" answered the abbe, "man is but man after all, and
you are about the best specimen of the genus I have ever
known. Come, let me show you my plan." The abbe then
showed Dantes the sketch he had made for their escape. It
consisted of a plan of his own cell and that of Dantes, with
the passage which united them. In this passage he proposed
to drive a level as they do in mines; this level would bring
the two prisoners immediately beneath the gallery where the
sentry kept watch; once there, a large excavation would be
made, and one of the flag-stones with which the gallery was
paved be so completely loosened that at the desired moment
it would give way beneath the feet of the soldier, who,
stunned by his fall, would be immediately bound and
gagged by Dantes before he had power to offer any
resistance. The prisoners were then to make their way
through one of the gallery windows, and to let themselves
down from the outer walls by means of the abbe's ladder of
cords. Dantes' eyes sparkled with joy, and he rubbed his
hands with delight at the idea of a plan so simple, yet
apparently so certain to succeed.
That very day the miners began their labors, with a vigor
and alacrity proportionate to their long rest from fatigue and
their hopes of ultimate success. Nothing interrupted the
progress of the work except the necessity that each was
under of returning to his cell in anticipation of the turnkey's
visits. They had learned to distinguish the almost
imperceptible sound of his footsteps as he descended
towards their dungeons, and happily, never failed of being
prepared for his coming. The fresh earth excavated during
their present work, and which would have entirely blocked
up the old passage, was thrown, by degrees and with the
utmost precaution, out of the window in either Faria's or
Dantes' cell, the rubbish being first pulverized so finely that
the night wind carried it far away without permitting the
smallest trace to remain. More than a year had been
consumed in this undertaking, the only tools for which had
been a chisel, a knife, and a wooden lever; Faria still
continuing to instruct Dantes by conversing with him,
sometimes in one language, sometimes in another; at others,
relating to him the history of nations and great men who
from time to time have risen to fame and trodden the path of
glory.

outward polish and politeness he had before been wanting
in, and which is seldom possessed except by those who have
been placed in constant intercourse with persons of high
birth and breeding. At the end of fifteen months the level
was finished, and the excavation completed beneath the
gallery, and the two workmen could distinctly hear the
measured tread of the sentinel as he paced to and fro over
their heads.
Compelled, as they were, to await a night sufficiently dark to
favor their flight, they were obliged to defer their final
attempt till that auspicious moment should arrive; their
greatest dread now was lest the stone through which the
sentry was doomed to fall should give way before its right
time, and this they had in some measure provided against by
propping it up with a small beam which they had discovered
in the walls through which they had worked their way.
Dantes was occupied in arranging this piece of wood when
he heard Faria, who had remained in Edmond's cell for the
purpose of cutting a peg to secure their rope-ladder, call to
him in a tone indicative of great suffering. Dantes hastened
to his dungeon, where he found him standing in the middle
of the room, pale as death, his forehead streaming with
perspiration, and his hands clinched tightly together.
"Gracious heavens!" exclaimed Dantes, "what is the matter?
what has happened?"
"Quick! quick!" returned the abbe, "listen to what I have to
say." Dantes looked in fear and wonder at the livid
countenance of Faria, whose eyes, already dull and sunken,
were surrounded by purple circles, while his lips were white
as those of a corpse, and his very hair seemed to stand on
end.
"Tell me, I beseech you, what ails you?" cried Dantes, letting
his chisel fall to the floor.
"Alas," faltered out the abbe, "all is over with me. I am seized
with a terrible, perhaps mortal illness; I can feel that the
paroxysm is fast approaching. I had a similar attack the year
previous to my imprisonment. This malady admits but of
one remedy; I will tell you what that is. Go into my cell as
quickly as you can; draw out one of the feet that support the
bed; you will find it has been hollowed out for the purpose
of containing a small phial you will see there half-filled with
a red-looking fluid. Bring it to me -- or rather -- no, no! -- I
may be found here, therefore help me back to my room
while I have the strength to drag myself along. Who knows
what may happen, or how long the attack may last?"
In spite of the magnitude of the misfortune which thus
suddenly frustrated his hopes, Dantes did not lose his
presence of mind, but descended into the passage, dragging
his unfortunate companion with him; then, half-carrying,
half-supporting him, he managed to reach the abbe's
chamber, when he immediately laid the sufferer on his bed.
"Thanks," said the poor abbe, shivering as though his veins
were filled with ice. "I am about to be seized with a fit of
catalepsy; when it comes to its height I shall probably lie still
and motionless as though dead, uttering neither sigh nor
groan. On the other hand, the symptoms may be much more
violent, and cause me to fall into fearful convulsions, foam at
the mouth, and cry out loudly. Take care my cries are not
heard, for if they are it is more than probable I should be
removed to another part of the prison, and we be separated
forever. When I become quite motionless, cold, and rigid as a
corpse, then, and not before, -- be careful about this, -- force
open my teeth with the knife, pour from eight to ten drops of
the liquor containted in the phial down my throat, and I may
perhaps revive."

The abbe was a man of the world, and had, moreover, mixed
in the first society of the day; he wore an air of melancholy
dignity which Dantes, thanks to the imitative powers
"Perhaps!" exclaimed Dantes in grief-stricken tones.
bestowed on him by nature, easily acquired, as well as that
62

"Help! help!" cried the abbe, "I -- I -- die -- I" --

And your third attack (if, indeed, you should have another)
will find you at liberty. We shall save you another time, as
So sudden and violent was the fit that the unfortunate
we have done this, only with a better chance of success,
prisoner was unable to complete the sentence; a violent
because we shall be able to command every requisite
convulsion shook his whole frame, his eyes started from
assistance."
their sockets, his mouth was drawn on one side, his cheeks
became purple, he struggled, foamed, dashed himself about, "My good Edmond," answered the abbe, "be not deceived.
and uttered the most dreadful cries, which, however, Dantes The attack which has just passed away, condemns me
prevented from being heard by covering his head with the forever to the walls of a prison. None can fly from a dungeon
blanket. The fit lasted two hours; then, more helpless than an who cannot walk."
infant, and colder and paler than marble, more crushed and
"Well, we will wait, -- a week, a month, two months, if need
broken than a reed trampled under foot, he fell back,
be, -- and meanwhile your strength will return. Everything is
doubled up in one last convulsion, and became as rigid as a
in readiness for our flight, and we can select any time we
corpse.
choose. As soon as you feel able to swim we will go."
Edmond waited till life seemed extinct in the body of his
"I shall never swim again," replied Faria. "This arm is
friend, then, taking up the knife, he with difficulty forced
paralyzed; not for a time, but forever. Lift it, and judge if I
open the closely fixed jaws, carefully administered the
am mistaken." The young man raised the arm, which fell
appointed number of drops, and anxiously awaited the
back by its own weight, perfectly inanimate and helpless. A
result. An hour passed away and the old man gave no sign
sigh escaped him.
of returning animation. Dantes began to fear he had delayed
too long ere he administered the remedy, and, thrusting his "You are convinced now, Edmond, are you not?" asked the
hands into his hair, continued gazing on the lifeless features abbe. "Depend upon it, I know what I say. Since the first
of his friend. At length a slight color tinged the livid cheeks, attack I experienced of this malady, I have continually
consciousness returned to the dull, open eyeballs, a faint sigh reflected on it. Indeed, I expected it, for it is a family
issued from the lips, and the sufferer made a feeble effort to inheritance; both my father and grandfather died of it in a
third attack. The physician who prepared for me the remedy
move.
I have twice successfully taken, was no other than the
"He is saved! He is saved!" cried Dantes in a paroxysm of
celebrated Cabanis, and he predicted a similar end for me."
delight.
"The physician may be mistaken!" exclaimed Dantes. "And
The sick man was not yet able to speak, but he pointed with
as for your poor arm, what difference will that make? I can
evident anxiety towards the door. Dantes listened, and
take you on my shoulders, and swim for both of us."
plainly distinguished the approaching steps of the jailer. It
was therefore near seven o'clock; but Edmond's anxiety had "My son," said the abbe, "you, who are a sailor and a
put all thoughts of time out of his head. The young man swimmer, must know as well as I do that a man so loaded
sprang to the entrance, darted through it, carefully drawing would sink before he had done fifty strokes. Cease, then, to
the stone over the opening, and hurried to his cell. He had allow yourself to be duped by vain hopes, that even your
scarcely done so before the door opened, and the jailer saw own excellent heart refuses to believe in. Here I shall remain
the prisoner seated as usual on the side of his bed. Almost till the hour of my deliverance arrives, and that, in all human
before the key had turned in the lock, and before the probability, will be the hour of my death. As for you, who
departing steps of the jailer had died away in the long are young and active, delay not on my account, but fly -- go-I
corridor he had to traverse, Dantes, whose restless anxiety give you back your promise."
concerning his friend left him no desire to touch the food "It is well," said Dantes. "Then I shall also remain." Then,
brought him, hurried back to the abbe's chamber, and raising rising and extending his hand with an air of solemnity over
the stone by pressing his head against it, was soon beside the the old man's head, he slowly added, "By the blood of Christ
sick man's couch. Faria had now fully regained his I swear never to leave you while you live."
consciousness, but he still lay helpless and exhausted.
Faria gazed fondly on his noble-minded, single-hearted,
"I did not expect to see you again," said he feebly, to Dantes. high-principled young friend, and read in his countenance
"And why not?" asked the young man. "Did you fancy ample confirmation of the sincerity of his devotion and the
loyalty of his purpose.
yourself dying?"
"Thanks," murmured the invalid, extending one hand. "I
accept. You may one of these days reap the reward of your
disinterested devotion. But as I cannot, and you will not, quit
this place, it becomes necessary to fill up the excavation
"Without you? Did you really think me capable of that?"
beneath the soldier's gallery; he might, by chance, hear the
"At least," said the abbe, "I now see how wrong such an hollow sound of his footsteps, and call the attention of his
opinion would have been. Alas, alas! I am fearfully officer to the circumstance. That would bring about a
exhausted and debilitated by this attack."
discovery which would inevitably lead to our being
separated. Go, then, and set about this work, in which,
"Be of good cheer," replied Dantes; "your strength will
unhappily, I can offer you no assistance; keep at it all night,
return." And as he spoke he seated himself near the bed
if necessary, and do not return here to-morrow till after the
beside Faria, and took his hands. The abbe shook his head.
jailer has visited me. I shall have something of the greatest
"The last attack I had," said he, "lasted but half an hour, and importance to communicate to you."
after it I was hungry, and got up without help; now I can
Dantes took the hand of the abbe in his, and affectionately
move neither my right arm nor leg, and my head seems
pressed it. Faria smiled encouragingly on him, and the
uncomfortable, which shows that there has been a suffusion
young man retired to his task, in the spirit of obedience and
of blood on the brain. The third attack will either carry me
respect which he had sworn to show towards his aged
off, or leave me paralyzed for life."
friend.
"No, no," cried Dantes; "you are mistaken -- you will not die!
"No, I had no such idea; but, knowing that all was ready for
flight, I thought you might have made your escape." The
deep glow of indignation suffused the cheeks of Dantes.

63


CHAPTER 18


Chapter 18

W

THE TREASURE

The Treasure

hen Dantes returned next morning to the chamber of
his companion in captivity, he found Faria seated and
looking composed. In the ray of light which entered by the
narrow window of his cell, he held open in his left hand, of
which alone, it will be recollected, he retained the use, a
sheet of paper, which, from being constantly rolled into a
small compass, had the form of a cylinder, and was not
easily kept open. He did not speak, but showed the paper to
Dantes.

"My words have not convinced you. I see you require proofs.
Well, then, read this paper, which I have never shown to any
one."

"What is that?" he inquired.

"I will not irritate him," thought Edmond, and taking the
paper, of which half was wanting, -- having been burnt, no
doubt, by some accident, -- he read: --

"Look at it," said the abbe with a smile.

"To-morrow, my dear friend," said Edmond, desirous of not
yielding to the old man's madness. "I thought it was
understood that we should not talk of that until to-morrow."
"Then we will not talk of it until to-morrow; but read this
paper to-day."

"I have looked at it with all possible attention," said Dantes,
"This treasure, which may amount to two...
"and I only see a half-burnt paper, on which are traces of
of Roman crowns in the most distant a...
Gothic characters inscribed with a peculiar kind of ink."
of the second opening wh...
"This paper, my friend," said Faria, "I may now avow to you, declare to belong to him alo...
since I have the proof of your fidelity -- this paper is my heir.
treasure, of which, from this day forth, one-half belongs to "25th April, l49"
you."
"Well!" said Faria, when the young man had finished reading
The sweat started forth on Dantes brow. Until this day and it.
for how long a time! -- he had refrained from talking of the
"Why," replied Dantes, "I see nothing but broken lines and
treasure, which had brought upon the abbe the accusation of
unconnected words, which are rendered illegible by fire."
madness. With his instinctive delicacy Edmond had
preferred avoiding any touch on this painful chord, and "Yes, to you, my friend, who read them for the first time; but
Faria had been equally silent. He had taken the silence of the not for me, who have grown pale over them by many nights'
old man for a return to reason; and now these few words study, and have reconstructed every phrase, completed
uttered by Faria, after so painful a crisis, seemed to indicate a every thought."
serious relapse into mental alienation.
"And do you believe you have discovered the hidden
"Your treasure?" stammered Dantes. Faria smiled.

meaning?"

"Yes," said he. "You have, indeed, a noble nature, Edmond,
and I see by your paleness and agitation what is passing in
your heart at this moment. No, be assured, I am not mad.
This treasure exists, Dantes, and if I have not been allowed
to possess it, you will. Yes -- you. No one would listen or
believe me, because everyone thought me mad; but you,
who must know that I am not, listen to me, and believe me
so afterwards if you will."

"I am sure I have, and you shall judge for yourself; but first
listen to the history of this paper."

and I tasted it slowly in the night of my dungeon and the
despair of my captivity. But now I have forgiven the world
for the love of you; now that I see you, young and with a
promising future, -- now that I think of all that may result to
you in the good fortune of such a disclosure, I shudder at
any delay, and tremble lest I should not assure to one as
worthy as yourself the possession of so vast an amount of
hidden wealth." Edmond turned away his head with a sigh.

During this time, Edmond, seated on his bed with his head
in his hands, tried to collect his scattered thoughts. Faria,
since their first acquaintance, had been on all points so
rational and logical, so wonderfully sagacious, in fact, that
he could not understand how so much wisdom on all points
could be allied with madness. Was Faria deceived as to his
treasure, or was all the world deceived as to Faria?

"Silence!" exclaimed Dantes. "Steps approach -- I go -- adieu."

And Dantes, happy to escape the history and explanation
which would be sure to confirm his belief in his friend's
mental instability, glided like a snake along the narrow
passage; while Faria, restored by his alarm to a certain
amount of activity, pushed the stone into place with his foot,
"Alas," murmured Edmond to himself, "this is a terrible and covered it with a mat in order the more effectually to
relapse! There was only this blow wanting." Then he said avoid discovery.
aloud, "My dear friend, your attack has, perhaps, fatigued
you; had you not better repose awhile? To-morrow, if you It was the governor, who, hearing of Faria's illness from the
will, I will hear your narrative; but to-day I wish to nurse jailer, had come in person to see him.
you carefully. Besides," he said, "a treasure is not a thing we Faria sat up to receive him, avoiding all gestures in order
need hurry about."
that he might conceal from the governor the paralysis that
"On the contrary, it is a matter of the utmost importance, had already half stricken him with death. His fear was lest
Edmond!" replied the old man. "Who knows if to-morrow, or the governor, touched with pity, might order him to be
the next day after, the third attack may not come on? and removed to better quarters, and thus separate him from his
then must not all be over? Yes, indeed, I have often thought young companion. But fortunately this was not the case, and
with a bitter joy that these riches, which would make the the governor left him, convinced that the poor madman, for
wealth of a dozen families, will be forever lost to those men whom in his heart he felt a kind of affection, was only
who persecute me. This idea was one of vengeance to me, troubled with a slight indisposition.

"You persist in your incredulity, Edmond," continued Faria.
64

Dantes remained in his cell all day, not daring to return to
his friend, thinking thus to defer the moment when he

should be convinced, once for all, that the abbe was mad -such a conviction would be so terrible!
But, towards the evening after the hour for the customary
visit had gone by, Faria, not seeing the young man appear,
tried to move and get over the distance which separated
them. Edmond shuddered when he heard the painful efforts
which the old man made to drag himself along; his leg was
inert, and he could no longer make use of one arm. Edmond
was obliged to assist him, for otherwise he would not have
been able to enter by the small aperture which led to Dantes'
chamber.
"Here I am, pursuing you remorselessly," he said with a
benignant smile. "You thought to escape my munificence,
but it is in vain. Listen to me."
Edmond saw there was no escape, and placing the old man
on his bed, he seated himself on the stool beside him.
"You know," said the abbe, "that I was the secretary and
intimate friend of Cardinal Spada, the last of the princes of
that name. I owe to this worthy lord all the happiness I ever
knew. He was not rich, although the wealth of his family had
passed into a proverb, and I heard the phrase very often, `As
rich as a Spada.' But he, like public rumor, lived on this
reputation for wealth; his palace was my paradise. I was
tutor to his nephews, who are dead; and when he was alone
in the world, I tried by absolute devotion to his will, to make
up to him all he had done for me during ten years of
unremitting kindness. The cardinal's house had no secrets
for me. I had often seen my noble patron annotating ancient
volumes, and eagerly searching amongst dusty family
manuscripts. One day when I was reproaching him for his
unavailing searches, and deploring the prostration of mind
that followed them, he looked at me, and, smiling bitterly,
opened a volume relating to the History of the City of Rome.
There, in the twentieth chapter of the Life of Pope Alexander
VI., were the following lines, which I can never forget: --

the two cardinals to dinner. This was a matter of dispute
between the holy father and his son. Caesar thought they
could make use of one of the means which he always had
ready for his friends, that is to say, in the first place, the
famous key which was given to certain persons with the
request that they go and open a designated cupboard. This
key was furnished with a small iron point, -- a negligence on
the part of the locksmith. When this was pressed to effect the
opening of the cupboard, of which the lock was difficult, the
person was pricked by this small point, and died next day.
Then there was the ring with the lion's head, which Caesar
wore when he wanted to greet his friends with a clasp of the
hand. The lion bit the hand thus favored, and at the end of
twenty-four hours, the bite was mortal. Caesar proposed to
his father, that they should either ask the cardinals to open
the cupboard, or shake hands with them; but Alexander VI.,
replied: `Now as to the worthy cardinals, Spada and
Rospigliosi, let us ask both of them to dinner, something tells
me that we shall get that money back. Besides, you forget,
Caesar, an indigestion declares itself immediately, while a
prick or a bite occasions a delay of a day or two.' Caesar gave
way before such cogent reasoning, and the cardinals were
consequently invited to dinner.
"The table was laid in a vineyard belonging to the pope, near
San Pierdarena, a charming retreat which the cardinals knew
very well by report. Rospigliosi, quite set up with his new
dignities, went with a good appetite and his most
ingratiating manner. Spada, a prudent man, and greatly
attached to his only nephew, a young captain of the highest
promise, took paper and pen, and made his will. He then
sent word to his nephew to wait for him near the vineyard;
but it appeared the servant did not find him.

"Spada knew what these invitations meant; since
Christianity, so eminently civilizing, had made progress in
Rome, it was no longer a centurion who came from the
tyrant with a message, `Caesar wills that you die.' but it was
"`The great wars of Romagna had ended; Caesar Borgia, who a legate a latere, who came with a smile on his lips to say
had completed his conquest, had need of money to purchase from the pope, `His holiness requests you to dine with him.'
all Italy. The pope had also need of money to bring matters "Spada set out about two o'clock to San Pierdarena. The pope
to an end with Louis XII. King of France, who was awaited him. The first sight that attracted the eyes of Spada
formidable still in spite of his recent reverses; and it was was that of his nephew, in full costume, and Caesar Borgia
necessary, therefore, to have recourse to some profitable paying him most marked attentions. Spada turned pale, as
scheme, which was a matter of great difficulty in the Caesar looked at him with an ironical air, which proved that
impoverished condition of exhausted Italy. His holiness had he had anticipated all, and that the snare was well spread.
an idea. He determined to make two cardinals.'
They began dinner and Spada was only able to inquire of his
"By choosing two of the greatest personages of Rome, nephew if he had received his message. The nephew replied
especially rich men -- this was the return the holy father no; perfectly comprehending the meaning of the question. It
looked for. In the first place, he could sell the great was too late, for he had already drunk a glass of excellent
appointments and splendid offices which the cardinals wine, placed for him expressly by the pope's butler. Spada at
already held; and then he had the two hats to sell besides. the same moment saw another bottle approach him, which
There was a third point in view, which will appear hereafter. he was pressed to taste. An hour afterwards a physician
The pope and Caesar Borgia first found the two future declared they were both poisoned through eating
cardinals; they were Giovanni Rospigliosi, who held four of mushrooms. Spada died on the threshold of the vineyard;
the highest dignities of the Holy See, and Caesar Spada, one the nephew expired at his own door, making signs which his
of the noblest and richest of the Roman nobility; both felt the wife could not comprehend.
high honor of such a favor from the pope. They were
ambitious, and Caesar Borgia soon found purchasers for
their appointments. The result was, that Rospigliosi and
Spada paid for being cardinals, and eight other persons paid
for the offices the cardinals held before their elevation, and
thus eight hundred thousand crowns entered into the coffers
of the speculators.

"Then Caesar and the pope hastened to lay hands on the
heritage, under presence of seeking for the papers of the
dead man. But the inheritance consisted in this only, a scrap
of paper on which Spada had written: -- `I bequeath to my
beloved nephew my coffers, my books, and, amongst others,
my breviary with the gold corners, which I beg he will
preserve in remembrance of his affectionate uncle.'

"It is time now to proceed to the last part of the speculation.
The pope heaped attentions upon Rospigliosi and Spada,
conferred upon them the insignia of the cardinalate, and
induced them to arrange their affairs and take up their
residence at Rome. Then the pope and Caesar Borgia invited

"The heirs sought everywhere, admired the breviary, laid
hands on the furniture, and were greatly astonished that
Spada, the rich man, was really the most miserable of uncles
-- no treasures -- unless they were those of science, contained
in the library and laboratories. That was all. Caesar and his
65


CHAPTER 18


THE TREASURE

father searched, examined, scrutinized, but found nothing,
or at least very little; not exceeding a few thousand crowns
in plate, and about the same in ready money; but the
nephew had time to say to his wife before he expired: `Look
well among my uncle's papers; there is a will.'

searched, ransacked, counted, calculated a thousand and a
thousand times the income and expenditure of the family for
three hundred years. It was useless. I remained in my
ignorance, and the Count of Spada in his poverty. My patron
died. He had reserved from his annuity his family papers,
his library, composed of five thousand volumes, and his
"They sought even more thoroughly than the august heirs
famous breviary. All these he bequeathed to me, with a
had done, but it was fruitless. There were two palaces and a
thousand Roman crowns, which he had in ready money, on
vineyard behind the Palatine Hill; but in these days landed
condition that I would have anniversary masses said for the
property had not much value, and the two palaces and the
repose of his soul, and that I would draw up a genealogical
vineyard remained to the family since they were beneath the
tree and history of his house. All this I did scrupulously. Be
rapacity of the pope and his son. Months and years rolled on.
easy, my dear Edmond, we are near the conclusion.
Alexander VI. died, poisoned, -- you know by what mistake.
Caesar, poisoned at the same time, escaped by shedding his "In 1807, a month before I was arrested, and a fortnight after
skin like a snake; but the new skin was spotted by the poison the death of the Count of Spada, on the 25th of December
till it looked like a tiger's. Then, compelled to quit Rome, he (you will see presently how the date became fixed in my
went and got himself obscurely killed in a night skirmish, memory), I was reading, for the thousandth time, the papers
scarcely noticed in history. After the pope's death and his I was arranging, for the palace was sold to a stranger, and I
son's exile, it was supposed that the Spada family would was going to leave Rome and settle at Florence, intending to
resume the splendid position they had held before the take with me twelve thousand francs I possessed, my library,
cardinal's time; but this was not the case. The Spadas and the famous breviary, when, tired with my constant labor
remained in doubtful ease, a mystery hung over this dark at the same thing, and overcome by a heavy dinner I had
affair, and the public rumor was, that Caesar, a better eaten, my head dropped on my hands, and I fell asleep
politician than his father, had carried off from the pope the about three o'clock in the afternoon. I awoke as the clock was
fortune of the two cardinals. I say the two, because Cardinal striking six. I raised my head; I was in utter darkness. I rang
Rospigliosi, who had not taken any precaution, was for a light, but as no one came, I determined to find one for
completely despoiled.
myself. It was indeed but anticipating the simple manners
which I should soon be under the necessity of adopting. I
"Up to this point," said Faria, interrupting the thread of his
took a wax-candle in one hand, and with the other groped
narrative, "this seems to you very meaningless, no doubt,
about for a piece of paper (my match-box being empty), with
eh?"
which I proposed to get a light from the small flame still
"Oh, my friend," cried Dantes, "on the contrary, it seems as if playing on the embers. Fearing, however, to make use of any
I were reading a most interesting narrative; go on, I beg of valuable piece of paper, I hesitated for a moment, then
you."
recollected that I had seen in the famous breviary, which was
on the table beside me, an old paper quite yellow with age,
"I will."
and which had served as a marker for centuries, kept there
"The family began to get accustomed to their obscurity. by the request of the heirs. I felt for it, found it, twisted it up
Years rolled on, and amongst the descendants some were together, and putting it into the expiring flame, set light to it.
soldiers, others diplomatists; some churchmen, some
bankers; some grew rich, and some were ruined. I come now "But beneath my fingers, as if by magic, in proportion as the
to the last of the family, whose secretary I was -- the Count fire ascended, I saw yellowish characters appear on the
of Spada. I had often heard him complain of the paper. I grasped it in my hand, put out the flame as quickly
disproportion of his rank with his fortune; and I advised him as I could, lighted my taper in the fire itself, and opened the
to invest all he had in an annuity. He did so, and thus crumpled paper with inexpressible emotion, recognizing,
doubled his income. The celebrated breviary remained in the when I had done so, that these characters had been traced in
family, and was in the count's possession. It had been mysterious and sympathetic ink, only appearing when
handed down from father to son; for the singular clause of exposed to the fire; nearly one-third of the paper had been
the only will that had been found, had caused it to be consumed by the flame. It was that paper you read this
regarded as a genuine relic, preserved in the family with morning; read it again, Dantes, and then I will complete for
superstitious veneration. It was an illuminated book, with you the incomplete words and unconnected sense."
beautiful Gothic characters, and so weighty with gold, that a Faria, with an air of triumph, offered the paper to Dantes,
servant always carried it before the cardinal on days of great who this time read the following words, traced with an ink
solemnity.
of a reddish color resembling rust: -"At the sight of papers of all sorts, -- titles, contracts,
parchments, which were kept in the archives of the family,
all descending from the poisoned cardinal, I in my turn
examined the immense bundles of documents, like twenty
servitors, stewards, secretaries before me; but in spite of the
most exhaustive researches, I found -- nothing. Yet I had
read, I had even written a precise history of the Borgia
family, for the sole purpose of assuring myself whether any
increase of fortune had occurred to them on the death of the
Cardinal Caesar Spada; but could only trace the acquisition
of the property of the Cardinal Rospigliosi, his companion in
misfortune.

"This 25th day of April, 1498, be...
Alexander VI., and fearing that not...
he may desire to become my heir, and re...
and Bentivoglio, who were poisoned,...
my sole heir, that I have bu...
and has visited with me, that is, in...
Island of Monte Cristo, all I poss...
jewels, diamonds, gems; that I alone...
may amount to nearly two mil...
will find on raising the twentieth ro...
creek to the east in a right line. Two open...
in these caves; the treasure is in the furthest a...
" I was then almost assured that the inheritance had neither which treasure I bequeath and leave en...
profited the Borgias nor the family, but had remained as my sole heir. "25th April, 1498. "Caes...
unpossessed like the treasures of the Arabian Nights, which "And now," said the abbe, "read this other paper;" and he
slept in the bosom of the earth under the eyes of the genie. I presented to Dantes a second leaf with fragments of lines
66

written on it, which Edmond read as follows: --

so soon as he had a son born to him, wished for a partition of
provinces) had their eyes on me; and my hasty departure,
"...ing invited to dine by his Holiness
the cause of which they were unable to guess, having
...content with making me pay for my hat,
aroused their suspicions, I was arrested at the very moment I
...serves for me the fate of Cardinals Caprara
was leaving Piombino.
...I declare to my nephew, Guido Spada
...ried in a place he knows "Now," continued Faria, addressing Dantes with an almost
...the caves of the small paternal expression, "now, my dear fellow, you know as
...essed of ingots, gold, money, much as I do myself. If we ever escape together, half this
...know of the existence of this treasure, which treasure is yours; if I die here, and you escape alone, the
...lions of Roman crowns, and which he whole belongs to you."
...ck from the small
"But," inquired Dantes hesitating, "has this treasure no more
...ings have been made
legitimate possessor in the world than ourselves?"
...ngle in the second;
...tire to him "No, no, be easy on that score; the family is extinct. The last
...ar Spada." Count of Spada, moreover, made me his heir, bequeathing to
me this symbolic breviary, he bequeathed to me all it
Faria followed him with an excited look. "and now," he said,
contained; no, no, make your mind satisfied on that point. If
when he saw that Dantes had read the last line, "put the two
we lay hands on this fortune, we may enjoy it without
fragments together, and judge for yourself." Dantes obeyed,
remorse."
and the conjointed pieces gave the following: -"And you say this treasure amounts to" -"This 25th day of April, 1498, be...ing invited to dine by his
Holiness Alexander VI., and fearing that not...content with "Two millions of Roman crowns; nearly thirteen millions of
making me pay for my hat, he may desire to become my heir, our money."*
and re...serves for me the fate of Cardinals Caprara and * $2,600,000 in 1894.
Bentivoglio, who were poisoned...I declare to my nephew,
Guido Spada, my sole heir, that I have bu...ried in a place he "Impossible!" said Dantes, staggered at the enormous
knows and has visited with me, that is, in...the caves of the amount.
small Island of Monte Cristo all I poss...ssed of ingots, gold, "Impossible? and why?" asked the old man. "The Spada
money, jewels, diamonds, gems; that I alone...know of the family was one of the oldest and most powerful families of
existence of this treasure, which may amount to nearly two the fifteenth century; and in those times, when other
mil...lions of Roman crowns, and which he will find on opportunities for investment were wanting, such
raising the twentieth ro...ck from the small creek to the east accumulations of gold and jewels were by no means rare;
in a right line. Two open...ings have been made in these there are at this day Roman families perishing of hunger,
caves; the treasure is in the furthest a...ngle in the second; though possessed of nearly a million in diamonds and jewels,
which treasure I bequeath and leave en...tire to him as my handed down by entail, and which they cannot touch."
sole heir. "25th April, 1498. "Caes...ar Spada."
Edmond thought he was in a dream -- he wavered between
incredulity and joy.
"Well, do you comprehend now?" inquired Faria.
"It is the declaration of Cardinal Spada, and the will so long
sought for," replied Edmond, still incredulous.
"Yes; a thousand times, yes!"
"And who completed it as it now is?"
"I did. Aided by the remaining fragment, I guessed the rest;
measuring the length of the lines by those of the paper, and
divining the hidden meaning by means of what was in part
revealed, as we are guided in a cavern by the small ray of
light above us."
"And what did you do when you arrived at this conclusion?"
"I resolved to set out, and did set out at that very instant,
carrying with me the beginning of my great work, the unity
of the Italian kingdom; but for some time the imperial police
(who at this period, quite contrary to what Napoleon desired

"I have only kept this secret so long from you," continued
Faria, "that I might test your character, and then surprise you.
Had we escaped before my attack of catalepsy, I should have
conducted you to Monte Cristo; now," he added, with a sigh,
"it is you who will conduct me thither. Well, Dantes, you do
not thank me?"
"This treasure belongs to you, my dear friend," replied
Dantes, "and to you only. I have no right to it. I am no
relation of yours."
"You are my son, Dantes," exclaimed the old man. "You are
the child of my captivity. My profession condemns me to
celibacy. God has sent you to me to console, at one and the
same time, the man who could not be a father, and the
prisoner who could not get free." And Faria extended the
arm of which alone the use remained to him to the young
man who threw himself upon his neck and wept.

67


CHAPTER 19


Chapter 19

THE THIRD ATTACK

The Third Attack

N

ow that this treasure, which had so long been the object
of the abbe's meditations, could insure the future
happiness of him whom Faria really loved as a son, it had
doubled its value in his eyes, and every day he expatiated on
the amount, explaining to Dantes all the good which, with
thirteen or fourteen millions of francs, a man could do in
these days to his friends; and then Dantes' countenance
became gloomy, for the oath of vengeance he had taken
recurred to his memory, and he reflected how much ill, in
these times, a man with thirteen or fourteen millions could
do to his enemies.
The abbe did not know the Island of Monte Cristo; but
Dantes knew it, and had often passed it, situated twenty-five
miles from Pianosa, between Corsica and the Island of Elba,
and had once touched there. This island was, always had
been, and still is, completely deserted. It is a rock of almost
conical form, which looks as though it had been thrust up by
volcanic force from the depth to the surface of the ocean.
Dantes drew a plan of the island for Faria, and Faria gave
Dantes advice as to the means he should employ to recover
the treasure. But Dantes was far from being as enthusiastic
and confident as the old man. It was past a question now
that Faria was not a lunatic, and the way in which he had
achieved the discovery, which had given rise to the
suspicion of his madness, increased Edmond's admiration of
him; but at the same time Dantes could not believe that the
deposit, supposing it had ever existed, still existed; and
though he considered the treasure as by no means chimerical,
he yet believed it was no longer there.

over the sea, which we take for terra firma, and which
evaporate and vanish as we draw near to them. To have you
as long as possible near me, to hear your eloquent speech, -which embellishes my mind, strengthens my soul, and
makes my whole frame capable of great and terrible things,
if I should ever be free, -- so fills my whole existence, that the
despair to which I was just on the point of yielding when I
knew you, has no longer any hold over me; and this -- this is
my fortune -- not chimerical, but actual. I owe you my real
good, my present happiness; and all the sovereigns of the
earth, even Caesar Borgia himself, could not deprive me of
this."

Thus, if not actually happy, yet the days these two
unfortunates passed together went quickly. Faria, who for so
long a time had kept silence as to the treasure, now
perpetually talked of it. As he had prophesied would be the
case, he remained paralyzed in the right arm and the left leg,
and had given up all hope of ever enjoying it himself. But he
was continually thinking over some means of escape for his
young companion, and anticipating the pleasure he would
enjoy. For fear the letter might be some day lost or stolen, he
compelled Dantes to learn it by heart; and Dantes knew it
from the first to the last word. Then he destroyed the second
portion, assured that if the first were seized, no one would
be able to discover its real meaning. Whole hours sometimes
passed while Faria was giving instructions to Dantes, -instructions which were to serve him when he was at liberty.
Then, once free, from the day and hour and moment when
he was so, he could have but one only thought, which was,
to gain Monte Cristo by some means, and remain there alone
However, as if fate resolved on depriving the prisoners of
under some pretext which would arouse no suspicions; and
their last chance, and making them understand that they
once there, to endeavor to find the wonderful caverns, and
were condemned to perpetual imprisonment, a new
search in the appointed spot, -- the appointed spot, be it
misfortune befell them; the gallery on the sea side, which
remembered, being the farthest angle in the second opening.
had long been in ruins, was rebuilt. They had repaired it
completely, and stopped up with vast masses of stone the In the meanwhile the hours passed, if not rapidly, at least
hole Dantes had partly filled in. But for this precaution, tolerably. Faria, as we have said, without having recovered
which, it will be remembered, the abbe had made to the use of his hand and foot, had regained all the clearness of
Edmond, the misfortune would have been still greater, for his understanding, and had gradually, besides the moral
their attempt to escape would have been detected, and they instructions we have detailed, taught his youthful
would undoubtedly have been separated. Thus a new, a companion the patient and sublime duty of a prisoner, who
stronger, and more inexorable barrier was interposed to cut learns to make something from nothing. They were thus
off the realization of their hopes.
perpetually employed, -- Faria, that he might not see himself
grow old; Dantes, for fear of recalling the almost extinct past
"You see," said the young man, with an air of sorrowful
which now only floated in his memory like a distant light
resignation, to Faria, "that God deems it right to take from
wandering in the night. So life went on for them as it does
me any claim to merit for what you call my devotion to you.
for those who are not victims of misfortune and whose
I have promised to remain forever with you, and now I
activities glide along mechanically and tranquilly beneath
could not break my promise if I would. The treasure will be
the eye of providence.
no more mine than yours, and neither of us will quit this
prison. But my real treasure is not that, my dear friend, But beneath this superficial calm there were in the heart of
which awaits me beneath the sombre rocks of Monte Cristo, the young man, and perhaps in that of the old man, many
it is your presence, our living together five or six hours a day, repressed desires, many stifled sighs, which found vent
in spite of our jailers; it is the rays of intelligence you have when Faria was left alone, and when Edmond returned to
elicited from my brain, the languages you have implanted in his cell. One night Edmond awoke suddenly, believing that
my memory, and which have taken root there with all their he heard some one calling him. He opened his eyes upon
philological ramifications. These different sciences that you utter darkness. His name, or rather a plaintive voice which
have made so easy to me by the depth of the knowledge you essayed to pronounce his name, reached him. He sat up in
possess of them, and the clearness of the principles to which bed and a cold sweat broke out upon his brow. Undoubtedly
you have reduced them -- this is my treasure, my beloved the call came from Faria's dungeon. "Alas," murmured
friend, and with this you have made me rich and happy. Edmond; "can it be?"
Believe me, and take comfort, this is better for me than tons
He moved his bed, drew up the stone, rushed into the
of gold and cases of diamonds, even were they not as
passage, and reached the opposite extremity; the secret
problematical as the clouds we see in the morning floating
68

entrance was open. By the light of the wretched and
wavering lamp, of which we have spoken, Dantes saw the
old man, pale, but yet erect, clinging to the bedstead. His
features were writhing with those horrible symptoms which
he already knew, and which had so seriously alarmed him
when he saw them for the first time.

from you forever, I wish you all the happiness and all the
prosperity you so well deserve. My son, I bless thee!" The
young man cast himself on his knees, leaning his head
against the old man's bed.

Edmond could only clasp his hands and exclaim, "Oh, my
friend, my friend, speak not thus!" and then resuming all his
presence of mind, which had for a moment staggered under
this blow, and his strength, which had failed at the words of
the old man, he said, "Oh, I have saved you once, and I will
save you a second time!" And raising the foot of the bed, he
drew out the phial, still a third filled with the red liquor.

strength to endure. At your age we have faith in life; it is the
privilege of youth to believe and hope, but old men see
death more clearly. Oh, 'tis here -- 'tis here -- 'tis over -- my
sight is gone -- my senses fail! Your hand, Dantes! Adieu -adieu!" And raising himself by a final effort, in which he
summoned all his faculties, he said, -- "Monte Cristo, forget
not Monte Cristo!" And he fell back on the bed. The crisis
was terrible, and a rigid form with twisted limbs, swollen
eyelids, and lips flecked with bloody foam, lay on the bed of
torture, in place of the intellectual being who so lately rested
there.

"Listen, now, to what I say in this my dying moment. The
treasure of the Spadas exists. God grants me the boon of
"Alas, my dear friend," said Faria in a resigned tone, "you vision unrestricted by time or space. I see it in the depths of
understand, do you not, and I need not attempt to explain to the inner cavern. My eyes pierce the inmost recesses of the
you?"
earth, and are dazzled at the sight of so much riches. If you
do escape, remember that the poor abbe, whom all the world
Edmond uttered a cry of agony, and, quite out of his senses,
called mad, was not so. Hasten to Monte Cristo -- avail
rushed towards the door, exclaiming, "Help, help!" Faria had
yourself of the fortune -- for you have indeed suffered long
just sufficient strength to restrain him.
enough." A violent convulsion attacked the old man. Dantes
"Silence," he said, "or you are lost. We must now only think raised his head and saw Faria's eyes injected with blood. It
of you, my dear friend, and so act as to render your captivity seemed as if a flow of blood had ascended from the chest to
supportable or your flight possible. It would require years to the head.
do again what I have done here, and the results would be
"Adieu, adieu!" murmured the old man, clasping Edmond's
instantly destroyed if our jailers knew we had
hand convulsively -- "adieu!"
communicated with each other. Besides, be assured, my dear
Edmond, the dungeon I am about to leave will not long "Oh, no, -- no, not yet," he cried; "do not forsake me! Oh,
remain empty; some other unfortunate being will soon take succor him! Help -- help -- help!"
my place, and to him you will appear like an angel of
"Hush -- hush!" murmured the dying man, "that they may
salvation. Perhaps he will be young, strong, and enduring,
not separate us if you save me!"
like yourself, and will aid you in your escape, while I have
been but a hindrance. You will no longer have half a dead "You are right. Oh, yes, yes; be assured I shall save you!
body tied to you as a drag to all your movements. At length Besides, although you suffer much, you do not seem to be in
providence has done something for you; he restores to you such agony as you were before."
more than he takes away, and it was time I should die."
"Do not mistake. I suffer less because there is in me less

"See," he exclaimed, "there remains still some of the magic
draught. Quick, quick! tell me what I must do this time; are
there any fresh instructions? Speak, my friend; I listen."
"There is not a hope," replied Faria, shaking his head, "but no
matter; God wills it that man whom he has created, and in
whose heart he has so profoundly rooted the love of life,
should do all in his power to preserve that existence, which,
however painful it may be, is yet always so dear."

Dantes took the lamp, placed it on a projecting stone above
the bed, whence its tremulous light fell with strange and
fantastic ray on the distorted countenance and motionless,
stiffened body. With steady gaze he awaited confidently the
moment for administering the restorative.

"Oh, yes, yes!" exclaimed Dantes; "and I tell you that I will
When he believed that the right moment had arrived, he
save you yet."
took the knife, pried open the teeth, which offered less
"Well, then, try. The cold gains upon me. I feel the blood resistance than before, counted one after the other twelve
flowing towards my brain. These horrible chills, which make drops, and watched; the phial contained, perhaps, twice as
my teeth chatter and seem to dislocate my bones, begin to much more. He waited ten minutes, a quarter of an hour,
pervade my whole frame; in five minutes the malady will half an hour, -- no change took place. Trembling, his hair
reach its height, and in a quarter of an hour there will be erect, his brow bathed with perspiration, he counted the
nothing left of me but a corpse."
seconds by the beating of his heart. Then he thought it was
time to make the last trial, and he put the phial to the purple
"Oh!" exclaimed Dantes, his heart wrung with anguish.
lips of Faria, and without having occasion to force open his
"Do as you did before, only do not wait so long, all the jaws, which had remained extended, he poured the whole of
springs of life are now exhausted in me, and death," he the liquid down his throat.
continued, looking at his paralyzed arm and leg, "has but
The draught produced a galvanic effect, a violent trembling
half its work to do. If, after having made me swallow twelve
pervaded the old man's limbs, his eyes opened until it was
drops instead of ten, you see that I do not recover, then pour
fearful to gaze upon them, he heaved a sigh which
the rest down my throat. Now lift me on my bed, for I can no
resembled a shriek, and then his convulsed body returned
longer support myself."
gradually to its former immobility, the eyes remaining open.
Edmond took the old man in his arms, and laid him on the
Half an hour, an hour, an hour and a half elapsed, and
bed.
during this period of anguish, Edmond leaned over his
"And now, my dear friend," said Faria, "sole consolation of friend, his hand applied to his heart, and felt the body
my wretched existence, -- you whom heaven gave me gradually grow cold, and the heart's pulsation become more
somewhat late, but still gave me, a priceless gift, and for and more deep and dull, until at length it stopped; the last
which I am most grateful, -- at the moment of separating movement of the heart ceased, the face became livid, the
69


CHAPTER 19


THE THIRD ATTACK

eyes remained open, but the eyeballs were glazed. It was six
o'clock in the morning, the dawn was just breaking, and its
feeble ray came into the dungeon, and paled the ineffectual
light of the lamp. Strange shadows passed over the
countenance of the dead man, and at times gave it the
appearance of life. While the struggle between day and night
lasted, Dantes still doubted; but as soon as the daylight
gained the pre-eminence, he saw that he was alone with a
corpse. Then an invincible and extreme terror seized upon
him, and he dared not again press the hand that hung out of
bed, he dared no longer to gaze on those fixed and vacant
eyes, which he tried many times to close, but in vain -- they
opened again as soon as shut. He extinguished the lamp,
carefully concealed it, and then went away, closing as well as
he could the entrance to the secret passage by the large stone
as he descended.
It was time, for the jailer was coming. On this occasion he
began his rounds at Dantes' cell, and on leaving him he went
on to Faria's dungeon, taking thither breakfast and some
linen. Nothing betokened that the man know anything of
what had occurred. He went on his way.
Dantes was then seized with an indescribable desire to know
what was going on in the dungeon of his unfortunate friend.
He therefore returned by the subterraneous gallery, and
arrived in time to hear the exclamations of the turnkey, who
called out for help. Other turnkeys came, and then was
heard the regular tramp of soldiers. Last of all came the
governor.

watching him: he would have stayed here fifty years, I'll
answer for it, without any attempt to escape."
"Still," said the governor, "I believe it will be requisite,
notwithstanding your certainty, and not that I doubt your
science, but in discharge of my official duty, that we should
be perfectly assured that the prisoner is dead." There was a
moment of complete silence, during which Dantes, still
listening, knew that the doctor was examining the corpse a
second time.
"You may make your mind easy," said the doctor; "he is dead.
I will answer for that."
"You know, sir," said the governor, persisting, "that we are
not content in such cases as this with such a simple
examination. In spite of all appearances, be so kind,
therefore, as to finish your duty by fulfilling the formalities
described by law."
"Let the irons be heated," said the doctor; "but really it is a
useless precaution." This order to heat the irons made Dantes
shudder. He heard hasty steps, the creaking of a door,
people going and coming, and some minutes afterwards a
turnkey entered, saying, -"Here is the brazier, lighted." There was a moment's silence,
and then was heard the crackling of burning flesh, of which
the peculiar and nauseous smell penetrated even behind the
wall where Dantes was listening in horror. The perspiration
poured forth upon the young man's brow, and he felt as if he
should faint.

Edmond heard the creaking of the bed as they moved the
corpse, heard the voice of the governor, who asked them to
throw water on the dead man's face; and seeing that, in spite
of this application, the prisoner did not recover, they sent for
the doctor. The governor then went out, and words of pity
fell on Dantes' listening ears, mingled with brutal laughter.

"You see, sir, he is really dead," said the doctor; "this burn in
the heel is decisive. The poor fool is cured of his folly, and
delivered from his captivity."

"Well, well," said one, "the madman has gone to look after
his treasure. Good journey to him!"

"Yes, sir; and, as he said, it was an ancient name. He was, too,
very learned, and rational enough on all points which did
not relate to his treasure; but on that, indeed, he was
intractable."

"With all his millions, he will not have enough to pay for his
shroud!" said another.
"Oh," added a third voice, "the shrouds of the Chateau d'If
are not dear!"
"Perhaps," said one of the previous speakers, "as he was a
churchman, they may go to some expense in his behalf."
"They may give him the honors of the sack."
Edmond did not lose a word, but comprehended very little
of what was said. The voices soon ceased, and it seemed to
him as if every one had left the cell. Still he dared not to
enter, as they might have left some turnkey to watch the
dead. He remained, therefore, mute and motionless, hardly
venturing to breathe. At the end of an hour, he heard a faint
noise, which increased. It was the governor who returned,
followed by the doctor and other attendants. There was a
moment's silence, -- it was evident that the doctor was
examining the dead body. The inquiries soon commenced.
The doctor analyzed the symptoms of the malady to which
the prisoner had succumbed, and declared that he was dead.
Questions and answers followed in a nonchalant manner
that made Dantes indignant, for he felt that all the world
should have for the poor abbe a love and respect equal to his
own.

"Wasn't his name Faria?" inquired one of the officers who
accompanied the governor.

"It is the sort of malady which we call monomania," said the
doctor.
"You had never anything to complain of?" said the governor
to the jailer who had charge of the abbe.
"Never, sir," replied the jailer, "never; on the contrary, he
sometimes amused me very much by telling me stories. One
day, too, when my wife was ill, he gave me a prescription
which cured her."
"Ah, ah!" said the doctor, "I did not know that I had a rival;
but I hope, governor, that you will show him all proper
respect."
"Yes, yes, make your mind easy, he shall be decently interred
in the newest sack we can find. Will that satisfy you?"
"Must this last formality take place in your presence, sir?"
inquired a turnkey.
"Certainly. But make haste -- I cannot stay here all day."
Other footsteps, going and coming, were now heard, and a
moment afterwards the noise of rustling canvas reached
Dantes' ears, the bed creaked, and the heavy footfall of a
man who lifts a weight sounded on the floor; then the bed
again creaked under the weight deposited upon it.

"I am very sorry for what you tell me," said the governor, "This evening," said the governor.
replying to the assurance of the doctor, "that the old man is
"Will there be any mass?" asked one of the attendants.
really dead; for he was a quiet, inoffensive prisoner, happy
"That is impossible," replied the governor. "The chaplain of
in his folly, and required no watching."
the chateau came to me yesterday to beg for leave of absence,
"Ah," added the turnkey, "there was no occasion for
in order to take a trip to Hyeres for a week. I told him I
70

would attend to the prisoners in his absence. If the poor abbe "Why, about ten or eleven o'clock."
had not been in such a hurry, he might have had his
"Shall we watch by the corpse?"
requiem."
"Of what use would it be? Shut the dungeon as if he were
"Pooh, pooh;" said the doctor, with the impiety usual in
alive -- that is all." Then the steps retreated, and the voices
persons of his profession; "he is a churchman. God will
died away in the distance; the noise of the door, with its
respect his profession, and not give the devil the wicked
creaking hinges and bolts ceased, and a silence more sombre
delight of sending him a priest." A shout of laughter
than that of solitude ensued, -- the silence of death, which
followed this brutal jest. Meanwhile the operation of putting
was all-pervasive, and struck its icy chill to the very soul of
the body in the sack was going on.
Dantes. Then he raised the flag-stone cautiously with his
"This evening," said the governor, when the task was ended. head, and looked carefully around the chamber. It was
empty, and Dantes emerged from the tunnel.
"At what hour?" inquired a turnkey.

71


CHAPTER 20


Chapter 20

O

THE CEMETERY OF THE CHATEAU D'IF

The Cemetery Of The Chateau D'if

n the bed, at full length, and faintly illuminated by the
pale light that came from the window, lay a sack of
canvas, and under its rude folds was stretched a long and
stiffened form; it was Faria's last winding-sheet, -- a
winding-sheet which, as the turnkey said, cost so little.
Everything was in readiness. A barrier had been placed
between Dantes and his old friend. No longer could Edmond
look into those wide-open eyes which had seemed to be
penetrating the mysteries of death; no longer could he clasp
the hand which had done so much to make his existence
blessed. Faria, the beneficent and cheerful companion, with
whom he was accustomed to live so intimately, no longer
breathed. He seated himself on the edge of that terrible bed,
and fell into melancholy and gloomy revery.

asleep, as was his frequent custom; entered the tunnel again,
drew the bed against the wall, returned to the other cell, took
from the hiding-place the needle and thread, flung off his
rags, that they might feel only naked flesh beneath the coarse
canvas, and getting inside the sack, placed himself in the
posture in which the dead body had been laid, and sewed up
the mouth of the sack from the inside.

He would have been discovered by the beating of his heart,
if by any mischance the jailers had entered at that moment.
Dantes might have waited until the evening visit was over,
but he was afraid that the governor would change his mind,
and order the dead body to be removed earlier. In that case
his last hope would have been destroyed. Now his plans
were fully made, and this is what he intended to do. If while
Alone -- he was alone again -- again condemned to silence -- he was being carried out the grave-diggers should discover
again face to face with nothingness! Alone! -- never again to that they were bearing a live instead of a dead body, Dantes
see the face, never again to hear the voice of the only human did not intend to give them time to recognize him, but with a
being who united him to earth! Was not Faria's fate the sudden cut of the knife, he meant to open the sack from top
better, after all -- to solve the problem of life at its source, to bottom, and, profiting by their alarm, escape; if they tried
even at the risk of horrible suffering? The idea of suicide, to catch him, he would use his knife to better purpose.
which his friend had driven away and kept away by his
If they took him to the cemetery and laid him in a grave, he
cheerful presence, now hovered like a phantom over the
would allow himself to be covered with earth, and then, as it
abbe's dead body.
was night, the grave-diggers could scarcely have turned
"If I could die," he said, "I should go where he goes, and their backs before he would have worked his way through
should assuredly find him again. But how to die? It is very the yielding soil and escaped. He hoped that the weight of
easy," he went on with a smile; "I will remain here, rush on earth would not be so great that he could not overcome it. If
the first person that opens the door, strangle him, and then he was detected in this and the earth proved too heavy, he
they will guillotine me." But excessive grief is like a storm at would be stifled, and then -- so much the better, all would be
sea, where the frail bark is tossed from the depths to the top over. Dantes had not eaten since the preceding evening, but
of the wave. Dantes recoiled from the idea of so infamous a he had not thought of hunger, nor did he think of it now. His
death, and passed suddenly from despair to an ardent desire situation was too precarious to allow him even time to reflect
for life and liberty.
on any thought but one.
The first risk that Dantes ran was, that the jailer, when he
brought him his supper at seven o'clock, might perceive the
"Die? oh, no," he exclaimed -- "not die now, after having
change that had been made; fortunately, twenty times at
lived and suffered so long and so much! Die? yes, had I died
least, from misanthropy or fatigue, Dantes had received his
years ago; but now to die would be, indeed, to give way to
jailer in bed, and then the man placed his bread and soup on
the sarcasm of destiny. No, I want to live; I shall struggle to
the table, and went away without saying a word. This time
the very last; I will yet win back the happiness of which I
the jailer might not be as silent as usual, but speak to Dantes,
have been deprived. Before I die I must not forget that I have
and seeing that he received no reply, go to the bed, and thus
my executioners to punish, and perhaps, too, who knows,
discover all.
some friends to reward. Yet they will forget me here, and I
shall die in my dungeon like Faria." As he said this, he When seven o'clock came, Dantes' agony really began. His
became silent and gazed straight before him like one hand placed upon his heart was unable to redress its
overwhelmed with a strange and amazing thought. throbbings, while, with the other he wiped the perspiration
Suddenly he arose, lifted his hand to his brow as if his brain from his temples. From time to time chills ran through his
wore giddy, paced twice or thrice round the dungeon, and whole body, and clutched his heart in a grasp of ice. Then he
then paused abruptly by the bed.
thought he was going to die. Yet the hours passed on
without any unusual disturbance, and Dantes knew that he
"Just God!" he muttered, "whence comes this thought? Is it
had escaped the first peril. It was a good augury. At length,
from thee? Since none but the dead pass freely from this
about the hour the governor had appointed, footsteps were
dungeon, let me take the place of the dead!" Without giving
heard on the stairs. Edmond felt that the moment had
himself time to reconsider his decision, and, indeed, that he
arrived, summoned up all his courage, held his breath, and
might not allow his thoughts to be distracted from his
would have been happy if at the same time he could have
desperate resolution, he bent over the appalling shroud,
repressed the throbbing of his veins. The footsteps -- they
opened it with the knife which Faria had made, drew the
were double -- paused at the door -- and Dantes guessed that
corpse from the sack, and bore it along the tunnel to his own
the two grave-diggers had come to seek him -- this idea was
chamber, laid it on his couch, tied around its head the rag he
soon converted into certainty, when he heard the noise they
wore at night around his own, covered it with his
made in putting down the hand-bier. The door opened, and
counterpane, once again kissed the ice-cold brow, and tried
a dim light reached Dantes' eyes through the coarse sack that
vainly to close the resisting eyes, which glared horribly,
covered him; he saw two shadows approach his bed, a third
turned the head towards the wall, so that the jailer might,
remaining at the door with a torch in its hand. The two men,
when he brought the evening meal, believe that he was
72

approaching the ends of the bed, took the sack by its
extremities.

same moment a cord was fastened round his feet with
sudden and painful violence.

"He's heavy though for an old and thin man," said one, as he
raised the head.

"Well, have you tied the knot?" inquired the grave-digger,
who was looking on.

"They say every year adds half a pound to the weight of the
bones," said another, lifting the feet.

"Yes, and pretty tight too, I can tell you," was the answer.

"Have you tied the knot?" inquired the first speaker.
"What would be the use of carrying so much more weight?"
was the reply, "I can do that when we get there."
"Yes, you're right," replied the companion.
"What's the knot for?" thought Dantes.
They deposited the supposed corpse on the bier. Edmond
stiffened himself in order to play the part of a dead man, and
then the party, lighted by the man with the torch, who went
first, ascended the stairs. Suddenly he felt the fresh and
sharp night air, and Dantes knew that the mistral was
blowing. It was a sensation in which pleasure and pain were
strangely mingled. The bearers went on for twenty paces,
then stopped, putting the bier down on the ground. One of
them went away, and Dantes heard his shoes striking on the
pavement.

"Move on, then." And the bier was lifted once more, and they
proceeded.
They advanced fifty paces farther, and then stopped to open
a door, then went forward again. The noise of the waves
dashing against the rocks on which the chateau is built,
reached Dantes' ear distinctly as they went forward.
"Bad weather!" observed one of the bearers; "not a pleasant
night for a dip in the sea."
"Why, yes, the abbe runs a chance of being wet," said the
other; and then there was a burst of brutal laughter. Dantes
did not comprehend the jest, but his hair stood erect on his
head.
"Well, here we are at last," said one of them. "A little farther
-- a little farther," said the other. "You know very well that
the last was stopped on his way, dashed on the rocks, and
the governor told us next day that we were careless fellows."

"Where am I?" he asked himself.

They ascended five or six more steps, and then Dantes felt
that they took him, one by the head and the other by the
"Really, he is by no means a light load!" said the other bearer,
heels, and swung him to and fro. "One!" said the
sitting on the edge of the hand-barrow. Dantes' first impulse
grave-diggers, "two! three!" And at the same instant Dantes
was to escape, but fortunately he did not attempt it.
felt himself flung into the air like a wounded bird, falling,
"Give us a light," said the other bearer, "or I shall never find falling, with a rapidity that made his blood curdle. Although
what I am looking for." The man with the torch complied, drawn downwards by the heavy weight which hastened his
although not asked in the most polite terms.
rapid descent, it seemed to him as if the fall lasted for a
"What can he be looking for?" thought Edmond. "The spade, century.
perhaps." An exclamation of satisfaction indicated that the At last, with a horrible splash, he darted like an arrow into
grave-digger had found the object of his search. "Here it is at the ice-cold water, and as he did so he uttered a shrill cry,
last," he said, "not without some trouble though."
stifled in a moment by his immersion beneath the waves.
"Yes," was the answer, "but it has lost nothing by waiting."

Dantes had been flung into the sea, and was dragged into its
As he said this, the man came towards Edmond, who heard depths by a thirty-six pound shot tied to his feet. The sea is
a heavy metallic substance laid down beside him, and at the the cemetery of the Chateau d'If.

73


CHAPTER 21


Chapter 21

THE ISLAND OF TIBOULEN

The Island Of Tiboulen

D

antes, although stunned and almost suffocated, had
sufficient presence of mind to hold his breath, and as
his right hand (prepared as he was for every chance) held his
knife open, he rapidly ripped up the sack, extricated his arm,
and then his body; but in spite of all his efforts to free
himself from the shot, he felt it dragging him down still
lower. He then bent his body, and by a desperate effort
severed the cord that bound his legs, at the moment when it
seemed as if he were actually strangled. With a mighty leap
he rose to the surface of the sea, while the shot dragged
down to the depths the sack that had so nearly become his
shroud.
Dantes waited only to get breath, and then dived, in order to
avoid being seen. When he arose a second time, he was fifty
paces from where he had first sunk. He saw overhead a
black and tempestuous sky, across which the wind was
driving clouds that occasionally suffered a twinkling star to
appear; before him was the vast expanse of waters, sombre
and terrible, whose waves foamed and roared as if before the
approach of a storm. Behind him, blacker than the sea,
blacker than the sky, rose phantom-like the vast stone
structure, whose projecting crags seemed like arms extended
to seize their prey, and on the highest rock was a torch
lighting two figures. He fancied that these two forms were
looking at the sea; doubtless these strange grave-diggers had
heard his cry. Dantes dived again, and remained a long time
beneath the water. This was an easy feat to him, for he
usually attracted a crowd of spectators in the bay before the
lighthouse at Marseilles when he swam there, and was
unanimously declared to be the best swimmer in the port.
When he came up again the light had disappeared.
He must now get his bearings. Ratonneau and Pomegue are
the nearest islands of all those that surround the Chateau d'If,
but Ratonneau and Pomegue are inhabited, as is also the islet
of Daume, Tiboulen and Lemaire were therefore the safest
for Dantes' venture. The islands of Tiboulen and Lemaire are
a league from the Chateau d'If; Dantes, nevertheless,
determined to make for them. But how could he find his way
in the darkness of the night? At this moment he saw the light
of Planier, gleaming in front of him like a star. By leaving
this light on the right, he kept the Island of Tiboulen a little
on the left; by turning to the left, therefore, he would find it.
But, as we have said, it was at least a league from the
Chateau d'If to this island. Often in prison Faria had said to
him, when he saw him idle and inactive, "Dantes, you must
not give way to this listlessness; you will be drowned if you
seek to escape, and your strength has not been properly
exercised and prepared for exertion." These words rang in
Dantes' ears, even beneath the waves; he hastened to cleave
his way through them to see if he had not lost his strength.
He found with pleasure that his captivity had taken away
nothing of his power, and that he was still master of that
element on whose bosom he had so often sported as a boy.

during which Dantes, excited by the feeling of freedom,
continued to cleave the waves. "Let us see," said he, "I have
swum above an hour, but as the wind is against me, that has
retarded my speed; however, if I am not mistaken, I must be
close to Tiboulen. But what if I were mistaken?" A shudder
passed over him. He sought to tread water, in order to rest
himself; but the sea was too violent, and he felt that he could
not make use of this means of recuperation.
"Well," said he, "I will swim on until I am worn out, or the
cramp seizes me, and then I shall sink;" and he struck out
with the energy of despair.
Suddenly the sky seemed to him to become still darker and
more dense, and heavy clouds seemed to sweep down
towards him; at the same time he felt a sharp pain in his
knee. He fancied for a moment that he had been shot, and
listened for the report; but he heard nothing. Then he put out
his hand, and encountered an obstacle and with another
stroke knew that he had gained the shore.
Before him rose a grotesque mass of rocks, that resembled
nothing so much as a vast fire petrified at the moment of its
most fervent combustion. It was the Island of Tiboulen.
Dantes rose, advanced a few steps, and, with a fervent
prayer of gratitude, stretched himself on the granite. which
seemed to him softer than down. Then, in spite of the wind
and rain, he fell into the deep, sweet sleep of utter
exhaustion. At the expiration of an hour Edmond was
awakened by the roar of thunder. The tempest was let loose
and beating the atmosphere with its mighty wings; from
time to time a flash of lightning stretched across the heavens
like a fiery serpent, lighting up the clouds that rolled on in
vast chaotic waves.
Dantes had not been deceived -- he had reached the first of
the two islands, which was, in fact, Tiboulen. He knew that it
was barren and without shelter; but when the sea became
more calm, he resolved to plunge into its waves again, and
swim to Lemaire, equally arid, but larger, and consequently
better adapted for concealment.
An overhanging rock offered him a temporary shelter, and
scarcely had he availed himself of it when the tempest burst
forth in all its fury. Edmond felt the trembling of the rock
beneath which he lay; the waves, dashing themselves against
it, wetted him with their spray. He was safely sheltered, and
yet he felt dizzy in the midst of the warring of the elements
and the dazzling brightness of the lightning. It seemed to
him that the island trembled to its base, and that it would,
like a vessel at anchor, break moorings, and bear him off into
the centre of the storm. He then recollected that he had not
eaten or drunk for four-and-twenty hours. He extended his
hands, and drank greedily of the rainwater that had lodged
in a hollow of the rock.

As he rose, a flash of lightning, that seemed to rive the
remotest heights of heaven, illumined the darkness. By its
Fear, that relentless pursuer, clogged Dantes' efforts. He light, between the Island of Lemaire and Cape Croiselle, a
listened for any sound that might be audible, and every time quarter of a league distant, Dantes saw a fishing-boat driven
that he rose to the top of a wave he scanned the horizon, and rapidly like a spectre before the power of winds and waves.
strove to penetrate the darkness. He fancied that every wave A second after, he saw it again, approaching with frightful
behind him was a pursuing boat, and he redoubled his rapidity. Dantes cried at the top of his voice to warn them of
exertions, increasing rapidly his distance from the chateau, their danger, but they saw it themselves. Another flash
but exhausting his strength. He swam on still, and already showed him four men clinging to the shattered mast and the
the terrible chateau had disappeared in the darkness. He rigging, while a fifth clung to the broken rudder.
could not see it, but he felt its presence. An hour passed,
74

The men he beheld saw him undoubtedly, for their cries
were carried to his ears by the wind. Above the splintered
mast a sail rent to tatters was waving; suddenly the ropes
that still held it gave way, and it disappeared in the darkness
of the night like a vast sea-bird. At the same moment a
violent crash was heard, and cries of distress. Dantes from
his rocky perch saw the shattered vessel, and among the
fragments the floating forms of the hapless sailors. Then all
was dark again.

He soon saw that the vessel, with the wind dead ahead, was
tacking between the Chateau d'If and the tower of Planier.
For an instant he feared lest, instead of keeping in shore, she
should stand out to sea; but he soon saw that she would pass,
like most vessels bound for Italy, between the islands of
Jaros and Calaseraigne. However, the vessel and the
swimmer insensibly neared one another, and in one of its
tacks the tartan bore down within a quarter of a mile of him.
He rose on the waves, making signs of distress; but no one
on board saw him, and the vessel stood on another tack.
Dantes ran down the rocks at the risk of being himself
Dantes would have shouted, but he knew that the wind
dashed to pieces; he listened, he groped about, but he heard
would drown his voice.
and saw nothing -- the cries had ceased, and the tempest
continued to rage. By degrees the wind abated, vast gray It was then he rejoiced at his precaution in taking the timber,
clouds rolled towards the west, and the blue firmament for without it he would have been unable, perhaps, to reach
appeared studded with bright stars. Soon a red streak the vessel -- certainly to return to shore, should he be
became visible in the horizon, the waves whitened, a light unsuccessful in attracting attention.
played over them, and gilded their foaming crests with gold.
Dantes, though almost sure as to what course the vessel
It was day.
would take, had yet watched it anxiously until it tacked and
Dantes stood mute and motionless before this majestic stood towards him. Then he advanced; but before they could
spectacle, as if he now beheld it for the first time; and indeed meet, the vessel again changed her course. By a violent effort
since his captivity in the Chateau d'If he had forgotten that he rose half out of the water, waving his cap, and uttering a
such scenes were ever to be witnessed. He turned towards loud shout peculiar to sailers. This time he was both seen
the fortress, and looked at both sea and land. The gloomy and heard, and the tartan instantly steered towards him. At
building rose from the bosom of the ocean with imposing the same time, he saw they were about to lower the boat.
majesty and seemed to dominate the scene. It was about five
An instant after, the boat, rowed by two men, advanced
o'clock. The sea continued to get calmer.
rapidly towards him. Dantes let go of the timber, which he
"In two or three hours," thought Dantes, "the turnkey will now thought to be useless, and swam vigorously to meet
enter my chamber, find the body of my poor friend, them. But he had reckoned too much upon his strength, and
recognize it, seek for me in vain, and give the alarm. Then then he realized how serviceable the timber had been to him.
the tunnel will be discovered; the men who cast me into the His arms became stiff, his legs lost their flexibility, and he
sea and who must have heard the cry I uttered, will be was almost breathless.
questioned. Then boats filled with armed soldiers will
He shouted again. The two sailors redoubled their efforts,
pursue the wretched fugitive. The cannon will warn every
and one of them cried in Italian, "Courage!"
one to refuse shelter to a man wandering about naked and
famished. The police of Marseilles will be on the alert by The word reached his ear as a wave which he no longer had
land, whilst the governor pursues me by sea. I am cold, I am the strength to surmount passed over his head. He rose
hungry. I have lost even the knife that saved me. O my God, again to the surface, struggled with the last desperate effort
I have suffered enough surely! Have pity on me, and do for of a drowning man, uttered a third cry, and felt himself
sinking, as if the fatal cannon shot were again tied to his feet.
me what I am unable to do for myself."
The water passed over his head, and the sky turned gray. A
As Dantes (his eyes turned in the direction of the Chateau
convulsive movement again brought him to the surface. He
d'If) uttered this prayer, he saw off the farther point of the
felt himself seized by the hair, then he saw and heard
Island of Pomegue a small vessel with lateen sail skimming
nothing. He had fainted.
the sea like a gull in search of prey; and with his sailor's eye
he knew it to be a Genoese tartan. She was coming out of When he opened his eyes Dantes found himself on the deck
Marseilles harbor, and was standing out to sea rapidly, her of the tartan. His first care was to see what course they were
sharp prow cleaving through the waves. "Oh," cried Edmond, taking. They were rapidly leaving the Chateau d'If behind.
"to think that in half an hour I could join her, did I not fear Dantes was so exhausted that the exclamation of joy he
being questioned, detected, and conveyed back to Marseilles! uttered was mistaken for a sigh.
What can I do? What story can I invent? under pretext of As we have said, he was lying on the deck. A sailor was
trading along the coast, these men, who are in reality rubbing his limbs with a woollen cloth; another, whom he
smugglers, will prefer selling me to doing a good action. I recognized as the one who had cried out "Courage!" held a
must wait. But I cannot -- I am starving. In a few hours my gourd full of rum to his mouth; while the third, an old sailer,
strength will be utterly exhausted; besides, perhaps I have at once the pilot and captain, looked on with that egotistical
not been missed at the fortress. I can pass as one of the pity men feel for a misfortune that they have escaped
sailors wrecked last night. My story will be accepted, for yesterday, and which may overtake them to-morrow.
there is no one left to contradict me."
A few drops of the rum restored suspended animation,
As he spoke, Dantes looked toward the spot where the while the friction of his limbs restored their elasticity.
fishing-vessel had been wrecked, and started. The red cap of
one of the sailors hung to a point of the rock and some "Who are you?" said the pilot in bad French.
timbers that had formed part of the vessel's keel, floated at "I am," replied Dantes, in bad Italian, "a Maltese sailor. We
the foot of the crag. It an instant Dantes' plan was formed. he were coming from Syracuse laden with grain. The storm of
swam to the cap, placed it on his head, seized one of the last night overtook us at Cape Morgion, and we were
timbers, and struck out so as to cut across the course the wrecked on these rocks."
vessel was taking.
"Where do you come from?"
"I am saved!" murmured he. And this conviction restored his
"From these rocks that I had the good luck to cling to while
strength.
our captain and the rest of the crew were all lost. I saw your
75


CHAPTER 21


THE ISLAND OF TIBOULEN

vessel, and fearful of being left to perish on the desolate
island, I swam off on a piece of wreckage to try and intercept
your course. You have saved my life, and I thank you,"
continued Dantes. "I was lost when one of your sailors
caught hold of my hair."
"It was I," said a sailor of a frank and manly appearance;
"and it was time, for you were sinking."
"Yes," returned Dantes, holding out his hand, "I thank you
again."
"I almost hesitated, though," replied the sailor; "you looked
more like a brigand than an honest man, with your beard six
inches, and your hair a foot long." Dantes recollected that his
hair and beard had not been cut all the time he was at the
Chateau d'If.

"Ah," said the captain, "we can agree very well, if you are
reasonable."
"Give me what you give the others, and it will be all right,"
returned Dantes.
"That's not fair," said the seaman who had saved Dantes; "for
you know more than we do."
"What is that to you, Jacopo?" returned the Captain. "Every
one is free to ask what he pleases."
"That's true," replied Jacopo; "I only make a remark."
"Well, you would do much better to find him a jacket and a
pair of trousers, if you have them."
"No," said Jacopo; "but I have a shirt and a pair of trousers."

"That is all I want," interrupted Dantes. Jacopo dived into the
"Yes," said he, "I made a vow, to our Lady of the Grotto not hold and soon returned with what Edmond wanted.
to cut my hair or beard for ten years if I were saved in a
"Now, then, do you wish for anything else?" said the patron.
moment of danger; but to-day the vow expires."
"A piece of bread and another glass of the capital rum I
"Now what are we to do with you?" said the captain.
tasted, for I have not eaten or drunk for a long time." He had
"Alas, anything you please. My captain is dead; I have barely not tasted food for forty hours. A piece of bread was brought,
escaped; but I am a good sailor. Leave me at the first port and Jacopo offered him the gourd.
you make; I shall be sure to find employment."
"Larboard your helm," cried the captain to the steersman.
"Do you know the Mediterranean?"
Dantes glanced that way as he lifted the gourd to his mouth;
then paused with hand in mid-air.
"I have sailed over it since my childhood."
"You know the best harbors?"

"Hollo! what's the matter at the Chateau d'If?" said the
captain.

"There are few ports that I could not enter or leave with a
A small white cloud, which had attracted Dantes' attention,
bandage over my eyes."
crowned the summit of the bastion of the Chateau d'If. At
"I say, captain," said the sailor who had cried "Courage!" to
the same moment the faint report of a gun was heard. The
Dantes, "if what he says is true, what hinders his staying
sailors looked at one another.
with us?"
"What is this?" asked the captain.
"If he says true," said the captain doubtingly. "But in his
present condition he will promise anything, and take his "A prisoner has escaped from the Chateau d'If, and they are
firing the alarm gun," replied Dantes. The captain glanced at
chance of keeping it afterwards."
him, but he had lifted the rum to his lips and was drinking it
"I will do more than I promise," said Dantes.
with so much composure, that suspicions, if the captain had
"We shall see," returned the other, smiling.
any, died away.
"Where are you going?" asked Dantes.
"To Leghorn."
"Then why, instead of tacking so frequently, do you not sail
nearer the wind?"
"Because we should run straight on to the Island of Rion."
"You shall pass it by twenty fathoms."
"Take the helm, and let us see what you know." The young
man took the helm, felt to see if the vessel answered the
rudder promptly and seeing that, without being a first-rate
sailer, she yet was tolerably obedient, --

"At any rate," murmured he, "if it be, so much the better, for I
have made a rare acquisition." Under pretence of being
fatigued, Dantes asked to take the helm; the steersman, glad
to be relieved, looked at the captain, and the latter by a sign
indicated that he might abandon it to his new comrade.
Dantes could thus keep his eyes on Marseilles.
"What is the day of the month?" asked he of Jacopo, who sat
down beside him.
"The 28th of February."
"In what year?"

"In what year -- you ask me in what year?"
"To the sheets," said he. The four seamen, who composed the
"Yes," replied the young man, "I ask you in what year!"
crew, obeyed, while the pilot looked on. "Haul taut." -- They
obeyed.
"You have forgotten then?"
"Belay." This order was also executed; and the vessel passed,
as Dantes had predicted, twenty fathoms to windward.
"Bravo!" said the captain.

"I got such a fright last night," replied Dantes, smiling, "that I
have almost lost my memory. I ask you what year is it?"

"The year 1829," returned Jacopo. It was fourteen years day
for day since Dantes' arrest. He was nineteen when he
"Bravo!" repeated the sailors. And they all looked with
entered the Chateau d'If; he was thirty-three when he
astonishment at this man whose eye now disclosed an
escaped. A sorrowful smile passed over his face; he asked
intelligence and his body a vigor they had not thought him
himself what had become of Mercedes, who must believe
capable of showing.
him dead. Then his eyes lighted up with hatred as he
"You see," said Dantes, quitting the helm, "I shall be of some thought of the three men who had caused him so long and
use to you, at least during the voyage. If you do not want me wretched a captivity. He renewed against Danglars, Fernand,
at Leghorn, you can leave me there, and I will pay you out of and Villefort the oath of implacable vengeance he had made
the first wages I get, for my food and the clothes you lend in his dungeon. This oath was no longer a vain menace; for
me."
the fastest sailer in the Mediterranean would have been
76

unable to overtake the little tartan, that with every stitch of

canvas set was flying before the wind to Leghorn.

77


CHAPTER 22


Chapter 22

THE SMUGGLERS

The Smugglers

D

antes had not been a day on board before he had a very
clear idea of the men with whom his lot had been cast.
Without having been in the school of the Abbe Faria, the
worthy master of The Young Amelia (the name of the
Genoese tartan) knew a smattering of all the tongues spoken
on the shores of that large lake called the Mediterranean,
from the Arabic to the Provencal, and this, while it spared
him interpreters, persons always troublesome and frequently
indiscreet, gave him great facilities of communication, either
with the vessels he met at sea, with the small boats sailing
along the coast, or with the people without name, country, or
occupation, who are always seen on the quays of seaports,
and who live by hidden and mysterious means which we
must suppose to be a direct gift of providence, as they have
no visible means of support. It is fair to assume that Dantes
was on board a smuggler.
At first the captain had received Dantes on board with a
certain degree of distrust. He was very well known to the
customs officers of the coast; and as there was between these
worthies and himself a perpetual battle of wits, he had at
first thought that Dantes might be an emissary of these
industrious guardians of rights and duties, who perhaps
employed this ingenious means of learning some of the
secrets of his trade. But the skilful manner in which Dantes
had handled the lugger had entirely reassured him; and then,
when he saw the light plume of smoke floating above the
bastion of the Chateau d'If, and heard the distant report, he
was instantly struck with the idea that he had on board his
vessel one whose coming and going, like that of kings, was
accompanied with salutes of artillery. This made him less
uneasy, it must be owned, than if the new-comer had proved
to be a customs officer; but this supposition also disappeared
like the first, when he beheld the perfect tranquillity of his
recruit.
Edmond thus had the advantage of knowing what the owner
was, without the owner knowing who he was; and however
the old sailor and his crew tried to "pump" him, they
extracted nothing more from him; he gave accurate
descriptions of Naples and Malta, which he knew as well as
Marseilles, and held stoutly to his first story. Thus the
Genoese, subtle as he was, was duped by Edmond, in whose
favor his mild demeanor, his nautical skill, and his
admirable dissimulation, pleaded. Moreover, it is possible
that the Genoese was one of those shrewd persons who
know nothing but what they should know, and believe
nothing but what they should believe.

went to work.
When the operation was concluded, and Edmond felt that
his chin was completely smooth, and his hair reduced to its
usual length, he asked for a hand-glass. He was now, as we
have said, three-and-thirty years of age, and his fourteen
years' imprisonment had produced a great transformation in
his appearance. Dantes had entered the Chateau d'If with the
round, open, smiling face of a young and happy man, with
whom the early paths of life have been smooth, and who
anticipates a future corresponding with his past. This was
now all changed. The oval face was lengthened, his smiling
mouth had assumed the firm and marked lines which
betoken resolution; his eyebrows were arched beneath a
brow furrowed with thought; his eyes were full of
melancholy, and from their depths occasionally sparkled
gloomy fires of misanthropy and hatred; his complexion, so
long kept from the sun, had now that pale color which
produces, when the features are encircled with black hair,
the aristocratic beauty of the man of the north; the profound
learning he had acquired had besides diffused over his
features a refined intellectual expression; and he had also
acquired, being naturally of a goodly stature, that vigor
which a frame possesses which has so long concentrated all
its force within itself.
To the elegance of a nervous and slight form had succeeded
the solidity of a rounded and muscular figure. As to his
voice, prayers, sobs, and imprecations had changed it so that
at times it was of a singularly penetrating sweetness, and at
others rough and almost hoarse. Moreover, from being so
long in twilight or darkness, his eyes had acquired the
faculty of distinguishing objects in the night, common to the
hyena and the wolf. Edmond smiled when he beheld himself:
it was impossible that his best friend -- if, indeed, he had any
friend left -- could recognize him; he could not recognize
himself.

The master of The Young Amelia, who was very desirous of
retaining amongst his crew a man of Edmond's value, had
offered to advance him funds out of his future profits, which
Edmond had accepted. His next care on leaving the barber's
who had achieved his first metamorphosis was to enter a
shop and buy a complete sailor's suit -- a garb, as we all
know, very simple, and consisting of white trousers, a
striped shirt, and a cap. It was in this costume, and bringing
back to Jacopo the shirt and trousers he had lent him, that
Edmond reappeared before the captain of the lugger, who
had made him tell his story over and over again before he
In this state of mutual understanding, they reached Leghorn. could believe him, or recognize in the neat and trim sailor
Here Edmond was to undergo another trial; he was to find the man with thick and matted beard, hair tangled with
out whether he could recognize himself, as he had not seen seaweed, and body soaking in seabrine, whom he had
his own face for fourteen years. He had preserved a tolerably picked up naked and nearly drowned. Attracted by his
good remembrance of what the youth had been, and was prepossessing appearance, he renewed his offers of an
now to find out what the man had become. His comrades engagement to Dantes; but Dantes, who had his own
believed that his vow was fulfilled. As he had twenty times projects, would not agree for a longer time than three
touched at Leghorn, he remembered a barber in St. months.
Ferdinand Street; he went there to have his beard and hair
The Young Amelia had a very active crew, very obedient to
cut. The barber gazed in amazement at this man with the
their captain, who lost as little time as possible. He had
long, thick and black hair and beard, which gave his head
scarcely been a week at Leghorn before the hold of his vessel
the appearance of one of Titian's portraits. At this period it
was filled with printed muslins, contraband cottons, English
was not the fashion to wear so large a beard and hair so long;
powder, and tobacco on which the excise had forgotten to
now a barber would only be surprised if a man gifted with
put its mark. The master was to get all this out of Leghorn
such advantages should consent voluntarily to deprive
free of duties, and land it on the shores of Corsica, where
himself of them. The Leghorn barber said nothing and
78

certain speculators undertook to forward the cargo to France.
They sailed; Edmond was again cleaving the azure sea
which had been the first horizon of his youth, and which he
had so often dreamed of in prison. He left Gorgone on his
right and La Pianosa on his left, and went towards the
country of Paoli and Napoleon. The next morning going on
deck, as he always did at an early hour, the patron found
Dantes leaning against the bulwarks gazing with intense
earnestness at a pile of granite rocks, which the rising sun
tinged with rosy light. It was the Island of Monte Cristo. The
Young Amelia left it three-quarters of a league to the
larboard, and kept on for Corsica.
Dantes thought, as they passed so closely to the island
whose name was so interesting to him, that he had only to
leap into the sea and in half an hour be at the promised land.
But then what could he do without instruments to discover
his treasure, without arms to defend himself? Besides, what
would the sailors say? What would the patron think? He
must wait.
Fortunately, Dantes had learned how to wait; he had waited
fourteen years for his liberty, and now he was free he could
wait at least six months or a year for wealth. Would he not
have accepted liberty without riches if it had been offered to
him? Besides, were not those riches chimerical? -- offspring
of the brain of the poor Abbe Faria, had they not died with
him? It is true, the letter of the Cardinal Spada was
singularly circumstantial, and Dantes repeated it to himself,
from one end to the other, for he had not forgotten a word.
Evening came, and Edmond saw the island tinged with the
shades of twilight, and then disappear in the darkness from
all eyes but his own, for he, with vision accustomed to the
gloom of a prison, continued to behold it last of all, for he
remained alone upon deck. The next morn broke off the
coast of Aleria; all day they coasted, and in the evening saw
fires lighted on land; the position of these was no doubt a
signal for landing, for a ship's lantern was hung up at the
mast-head instead of the streamer, and they came to within a
gunshot of the shore. Dantes noticed that the captain of The
Young Amelia had, as he neared the land, mounted two
small culverins, which, without making much noise, can
throw a four ounce ball a thousand paces or so.
But on this occasion the precaution was superfluous, and
everything proceeded with the utmost smoothness and
politeness. Four shallops came off with very little noise
alongside the lugger, which, no doubt, in acknowledgement
of the compliment, lowered her own shallop into the sea,
and the five boats worked so well that by two o'clock in the
morning all the cargo was out of The Young Amelia and on
terra firma. The same night, such a man of regularity was the
patron of The Young Amelia, the profits were divided, and
each man had a hundred Tuscan livres, or about eighty
francs. But the voyage was not ended. They turned the
bowsprit towards Sardinia, where they intended to take in a
cargo, which was to replace what had been discharged. The
second operation was as successful as the first, The Young
Amelia was in luck. This new cargo was destined for the
coast of the Duchy of Lucca, and consisted almost entirely of
Havana cigars, sherry, and Malaga wines.

when wounded had exclaimed with the great philosopher,
"Pain, thou art not an evil." He had, moreover, looked upon
the customs officer wounded to death, and, whether from
heat of blood produced by the encounter, or the chill of
human sentiment, this sight had made but slight impression
upon him. Dantes was on the way he desired to follow, and
was moving towards the end he wished to achieve; his heart
was in a fair way of petrifying in his bosom. Jacopo, seeing
him fall, had believed him killed, and rushing towards him
raised him up, and then attended to him with all the
kindness of a devoted comrade.
This world was not then so good as Doctor Pangloss
believed it, neither was it so wicked as Dantes thought it,
since this man, who had nothing to expect from his comrade
but the inheritance of his share of the prize-money,
manifested so much sorrow when he saw him fall.
Fortunately, as we have said, Edmond was only wounded,
and with certain herbs gathered at certain seasons, and sold
to the smugglers by the old Sardinian women, the wound
soon closed. Edmond then resolved to try Jacopo, and
offered him in return for his attention a share of his
prize-money, but Jacopo refused it indignantly.
As a result of the sympathetic devotion which Jacopo had
from the first bestowed on Edmond, the latter was moved to
a certain degree of affection. But this sufficed for Jacopo,
who instinctively felt that Edmond had a right to superiority
of position -- a superiority which Edmond had concealed
from all others. And from this time the kindness which
Edmond showed him was enough for the brave seaman.
Then in the long days on board ship, when the vessel,
gliding on with security over the azure sea, required no care
but the hand of the helmsman, thanks to the favorable winds
that swelled her sails, Edmond, with a chart in his hand,
became the instructor of Jacopo, as the poor Abbe Faria had
been his tutor. He pointed out to him the bearings of the
coast, explained to him the variations of the compass, and
taught him to read in that vast book opened over our heads
which they call heaven, and where God writes in azure with
letters of diamonds. And when Jacopo inquired of him,
"What is the use of teaching all these things to a poor sailor
like me?" Edmond replied, "Who knows? You may one day
be the captain of a vessel. Your fellow-countryman,
Bonaparte, became emperor." We had forgotten to say that
Jacopo was a Corsican.

Two months and a half elapsed in these trips, and Edmond
had become as skilful a coaster as he had been a hardy
seaman; he had formed an acquaintance with all the
smugglers on the coast, and learned all the Masonic signs by
which these half pirates recognize each other. He had passed
and re-passed his Island of Monte Cristo twenty times, but
not once had he found an opportunity of landing there. He
then formed a resolution. As soon as his engagement with
the patron of The Young Amelia ended, he would hire a
small vessel on his own account -- for in his several voyages
he had amassed a hundred piastres -- and under some
pretext land at the Island of Monte Cristo. Then he would be
free to make his researches, not perhaps entirely at liberty,
for he would be doubtless watched by those who
accompanied him. But in this world we must risk something.
There they had a bit of a skirmish in getting rid of the duties;
Prison had made Edmond prudent, and he was desirous of
the excise was, in truth, the everlasting enemy of the patron
running no risk whatever. But in vain did he rack his
of The Young Amelia. A customs officer was laid low, and
imagination; fertile as it was, he could not devise any plan
two sailors wounded; Dantes was one of the latter, a ball
for reaching the island without companionship.
having touched him in the left shoulder. Dantes was almost
glad of this affray, and almost pleased at being wounded, for Dantes was tossed about on these doubts and wishes, when
they were rude lessons which taught him with what eye he the patron, who had great confidence in him, and was very
could view danger, and with what endurance he could bear desirous of retaining him in his service, took him by the arm
suffering. He had contemplated danger with a smile, and one evening and led him to a tavern on the Via del' Oglio,
79


CHAPTER 22


THE SMUGGLERS

where the leading smugglers of Leghorn used to congregate
and discuss affairs connected with their trade. Already
Dantes had visited this maritime Bourse two or three times,
and seeing all these hardy free-traders, who supplied the
whole coast for nearly two hundred leagues in extent, he had
asked himself what power might not that man attain who
should give the impulse of his will to all these contrary and
diverging minds. This time it was a great matter that was
under discussion, connected with a vessel laden with Turkey
carpets, stuffs of the Levant, and cashmeres. It was necessary
to find some neutral ground on which an exchange could be
made, and then to try and land these goods on the coast of
France. If the venture was successful the profit would be
enormous, there would be a gain of fifty or sixty piastres
each for the crew.
The patron of The Young Amelia proposed as a place of
landing the Island of Monte Cristo, which being completely
deserted, and having neither soldiers nor revenue officers,

80

seemed to have been placed in the midst of the ocean since
the time of the heathen Olympus by Mercury, the god of
merchants and robbers, classes of mankind which we in
modern times have separated if not made distinct, but which
antiquity appears to have included in the same category. At
the mention of Monte Cristo Dantes started with joy; he rose
to conceal his emotion, and took a turn around the smoky
tavern, where all the languages of the known world were
jumbled in a lingua franca. When he again joined the two
persons who had been discussing the matter, it had been
decided that they should touch at Monte Cristo and set out
on the following night. Edmond, being consulted, was of
opinion that the island afforded every possible security, and
that great enterprises to be well done should be done quickly.
Nothing then was altered in the plan, and orders were given
to get under weigh next night, and, wind and weather
permitting, to make the neutral island by the following day.


Chapter 23

The Island Of Monte Cristo

T

hus, at length, by one of the unexpected strokes of
fortune which sometimes befall those who have for a
long time been the victims of an evil destiny, Dantes was
about to secure the opportunity he wished for, by simple
and natural means, and land on the island without incurring
any suspicion. One night more and he would be on his way.

he came on deck, as the boat was about to double the Island
of Elba. They were just abreast of Mareciana, and beyond the
flat but verdant Island of La Pianosa. The peak of Monte
Cristo reddened by the burning sun, was seen against the
azure sky. Dantes ordered the helmsman to put down his
helm, in order to leave La Pianosa to starboard, as he knew
that he should shorten his course by two or three knots.
The night was one of feverish distraction, and in its progress
About five o'clock in the evening the island was distinct, and
visions good and evil passed through Dantes' mind. If he
everything on it was plainly perceptible, owing to that
closed his eyes, he saw Cardinal Spada's letter written on the
clearness of the atmosphere peculiar to the light which the
wall in characters of flame -- if he slept for a moment the
rays of the sun cast at its setting.
wildest dreams haunted his brain. He ascended into grottos
paved with emeralds, with panels of rubies, and the roof Edmond gazed very earnestly at the mass of rocks which
glowing with diamond stalactites. Pearls fell drop by drop, gave out all the variety of twilight colors, from the brightest
as subterranean waters filter in their caves. Edmond, amazed, pink to the deepest blue; and from time to time his cheeks
wonderstruck, filled his pockets with the radiant gems and flushed, his brow darkened, and a mist passed over his eyes.
then returned to daylight, when he discovered that his prizes Never did gamester, whose whole fortune is staked on one
had all changed into common pebbles. He then endeavored cast of the die, experience the anguish which Edmond felt in
to re-enter the marvellous grottos, but they had suddenly his paroxysms of hope. Night came, and at ten o'clock they
receded, and now the path became a labyrinth, and then the anchored. The Young Amelia was first at the rendezvous. In
entrance vanished, and in vain did he tax his memory for the spite of his usual command over himself, Dantes could not
magic and mysterious word which opened the splendid restrain his impetuosity. He was the first to jump on shore;
caverns of Ali Baba to the Arabian fisherman. All was and had he dared, he would, like Lucius Brutus, have
useless, the treasure disappeared, and had again reverted to "kissed his mother earth." It was dark, but at eleven o'clock
the genii from whom for a moment he had hoped to carry it the moon rose in the midst of the ocean, whose every wave
off. The day came at length, and was almost as feverish as she silvered, and then, "ascending high," played in floods of
the night had been, but it brought reason to the aid of pale light on the rocky hills of this second Pelion.
imagination, and Dantes was then enabled to arrange a plan
The island was familiar to the crew of The Young Amelia, -which had hitherto been vague and unsettled in his brain.
it was one of her regular haunts. As to Dantes, he had passed
Night came, and with it the preparation for departure, and
it on his voyage to and from the Levant, but never touched
these preparations served to conceal Dantes' agitation. He
at it. He questioned Jacopo. "Where shall we pass the night?"
had by degrees assumed such authority over his companions
he inquired.
that he was almost like a commander on board; and as his
orders were always clear, distinct, and easy of execution, his
comrades obeyed him with celerity and pleasure.
"Why, on board the tartan," replied the sailor.
The old patron did not interfere, for he too had recognized
the superiority of Dantes over the crew and himself. He saw
in the young man his natural successor, and regretted that he
had not a daughter, that he might have bound Edmond to
him by a more secure alliance. At seven o'clock in the
evening all was ready, and at ten minutes past seven they
doubled the lighthouse just as the beacon was kindled. The
sea was calm, and, with a fresh breeze from the south-east,
they sailed beneath a bright blue sky, in which God also
lighted up in turn his beacon lights, each of which is a world.
Dantes told them that all hands might turn in, and he would
take the helm. When the Maltese (for so they called Dantes)
had said this, it was sufficient, and all went to their bunks
contentedly. This frequently happened. Dantes, cast from
solitude into the world, frequently experienced an imperious
desire for solitude; and what solitude is more complete, or
more poetical, then that of a ship floating in isolation on the
sea during the obscurity of the night, in the silence of
immensity, and under the eye of heaven?

"Should we not do better in the grottos?"
"What grottos?"
"Why, the grottos -- caves of the island."
"I do not know of any grottos," replied Jacopo. The cold
sweat sprang forth on Dantes' brow.
"What, are there no grottos at Monte Cristo?" he asked.
"None."

For a moment Dantes was speechless; then he remembered
that these caves might have been filled up by some accident,
or even stopped up, for the sake of greater security, by
Cardinal Spada. The point was, then, to discover the hidden
entrance. It was useless to search at night, and Dantes
therefore delayed all investigation until the morning. Besides,
a signal made half a league out at sea, and to which The
Young Amelia replied by a similar signal, indicated that the
moment for business had come. The boat that now arrived,
assured by the answering signal that all was well, soon came
Now this solitude was peopled with his thoughts, the night in sight, white and silent as a phantom, and cast anchor
lighted up by his illusions, and the silence animated by his within a cable's length of shore.
anticipations. When the patron awoke, the vessel was
hurrying on with every sail set, and every sail full with the Then the landing began. Dantes reflected, as he worked, on
breeze. They were making nearly ten knots an hour. The the shout of joy which, with a single word, he could evoke
Island of Monte Cristo loomed large in the horizon. Edmond from all these men, if he gave utterance to the one
resigned the lugger to the master's care, and went and lay unchanging thought that pervaded his heart; but, far from
down in his hammock; but, in spite of a sleepless night, he disclosing this precious secret, he almost feared that he had
could not close his eyes for a moment. Two hours afterwards already said too much, and by his restlessness and continual
81


CHAPTER 23


THE ISLAND OF MONTE CRISTO

questions, his minute observations and evident
pre-occupation, aroused suspicions. Fortunately, as regarded
this circumstance at least, his painful past gave to his
countenance an indelible sadness, and the glimmerings of
gayety seen beneath this cloud were indeed but transitory.
No one had the slightest suspicion; and when next day,
taking a fowling-piece, powder, and shot, Dantes declared
his intention to go and kill some of the wild goats that were
seen springing from rock to rock, his wish was construed
into a love of sport, or a desire for solitude. However, Jacopo
insisted on following him, and Dantes did not oppose this,
fearing if he did so that he might incur distrust. Scarcely,
however, had they gone a quarter of a league when, having
killed a kid, he begged Jacopo to take it to his comrades, and
request them to cook it, and when ready to let him know by
firing a gun. This and some dried fruits and a flask of Monte
Pulciano, was the bill of fare. Dantes went on, looking from
time to time behind and around about him. Having reached
the summit of a rock, he saw, a thousand feet beneath him,
his companions, whom Jacopo had rejoined, and who were
all busy preparing the repast which Edmond's skill as a
marksman had augmented with a capital dish.

comrades by the inequalities of the ground, that at sixty
paces from the harbor the marks ceased; nor did they
terminate at any grotto. A large round rock, placed solidly
on its base, was the only spot to which they seemed to lead.
Edmond concluded that perhaps instead of having reached
the end of the route he had only explored its beginning, and
he therefore turned round and retraced his steps.
Meanwhile his comrades had prepared the repast, had got
some water from a spring, spread out the fruit and bread,
and cooked the kid. Just at the moment when they were
taking the dainty animal from the spit, they saw Edmond
springing with the boldness of a chamois from rock to rock,
and they fired the signal agreed upon. The sportsman
instantly changed his direction, and ran quickly towards
them. But even while they watched his daring progress,
Edmond's foot slipped, and they saw him stagger on the
edge of a rock and disappear. They all rushed towards him,
for all loved Edmond in spite of his superiority; yet Jacopo
reached him first.

He found Edmond lying prone, bleeding, and almost
senseless. He had rolled down a declivity of twelve or fifteen
feet. They poured a little rum down his throat, and this
Edmond looked at them for a moment with the sad and remedy which had before been so beneficial to him,
gentle smile of a man superior to his fellows. "In two hours' produced the same effect as formerly. Edmond opened his
time," said he, "these persons will depart richer by fifty eyes, complained of great pain in his knee, a feeling of
piastres each, to go and risk their lives again by endeavoring heaviness in his head, and severe pains in his loins. They
to gain fifty more; then they will return with a fortune of six wished to carry him to the shore; but when they touched
hundred francs, and waste this treasure in some city with the him, although under Jacopo's directions, he declared, with
pride of sultans and the insolence of nabobs. At this moment heavy groans, that he could not bear to be moved.
hope makes me despise their riches, which seem to me
It may be supposed that Dantes did not now think of his
contemptible. Yet perchance to-morrow deception will so act
dinner, but he insisted that his comrades, who had not his
on me, that I shall, on compulsion, consider such a
reasons for fasting, should have their meal. As for himself,
contemptible possession as the utmost happiness. Oh, no!"
he declared that he had only need of a little rest, and that
exclaimed Edmond, "that will not be. The wise, unerring
when they returned he should be easier. The sailors did not
Faria could not be mistaken in this one thing. Besides, it
require much urging. They were hungry, and the smell of
were better to die than to continue to lead this low and
the roasted kid was very savory, and your tars are not very
wretched life." Thus Dantes, who but three months before
ceremonious. An hour afterwards they returned. All that
had no desire but liberty had now not liberty enough, and
Edmond had been able to do was to drag himself about a
panted for wealth. The cause was not in Dantes, but in
dozen paces forward to lean against a moss-grown rock.
providence, who, while limiting the power of man, has filled
But, instead of growing easier, Dantes' pains appeared to
him with boundless desires.
increase in violence. The old patron, who was obliged to sail
Meanwhile, by a cleft between two walls of rock, following a
in the morning in order to land his cargo on the frontiers of
path worn by a torrent, and which, in all human probability,
Piedmont and France, between Nice and Frejus, urged
human foot had never before trod, Dantes approached the
Dantes to try and rise. Edmond made great exertions in
spot where he supposed the grottos must have existed.
order to comply; but at each effort he fell back, moaning and
Keeping along the shore, and examining the smallest object
turning pale.
with serious attention, he thought he could trace, on certain
"He has broken his ribs," said the commander, in a low voice.
rocks, marks made by the hand of man.
"No matter; he is an excellent fellow, and we must not leave
Time, which encrusts all physical substances with its mossy
him. We will try and carry him on board the tartan." Dantes
mantle, as it invests all things of the mind with forgetfulness,
declared, however, that he would rather die where he was
seemed to have respected these signs, which apparently had
than undergo the agony which the slightest movement cost
been made with some degree of regularity, and probably
him. "Well," said the patron, "let what may happen, it shall
with a definite purpose. Occasionally the marks were hidden
never be said that we deserted a good comrade like you. We
under tufts of myrtle, which spread into large bushes laden
will not go till evening." This very much astonished the
with blossoms, or beneath parasitical lichen. So Edmond had
sailors, although, not one opposed it. The patron was so
to separate the branches or brush away the moss to know
strict that this was the first time they had ever seen him give
where the guide-marks were. The sight of marks renewed
up an enterprise, or even delay in its execution. Dantes
Edmond fondest hopes. Might it not have been the cardinal
would not allow that any such infraction of regular and
himself who had first traced them, in order that they might
proper rules should be made in his favor. "No, no," he said to
serve as a guide for his nephew in the event of a catastrophe,
the patron, "I was awkward, and it is just that I pay the
which he could not foresee would have been so complete.
penalty of my clumsiness. Leave me a small supply of biscuit,
This solitary place was precisely suited to the requirements
a gun, powder, and balls, to kill the kids or defend myself at
of a man desirous of burying treasure. Only, might not these
need, and a pickaxe, that I may build a shelter if you delay in
betraying marks have attracted other eyes than those for
coming back for me."
whom they were made? and had the dark and wondrous
"But you'll die of hunger," said the patron.
island indeed faithfully guarded its precious secret?
It seemed, however, to Edmond, who was hidden from his "I would rather do so," was Edmond reply, "than suffer the
82

inexpressible agonies which the slightest movement causes
me." The patron turned towards his vessel, which was
rolling on the swell in the little harbor, and, with sails partly
set, would be ready for sea when her toilet should be
completed.

generous intentions; but I do not wish any one to stay with
me. A day or two of rest will set me up, and I hope I shall
find among the rocks certain herbs most excellent for
bruises."

A peculiar smile passed over Dantes' lips; he squeezed
Jacopo's hand warmly, but nothing could shake his
determination to remain -- and remain alone. The smugglers
left with Edmond what he had requested and set sail, but not
"Go, go!" exclaimed Dantes.
without turning about several times, and each time making
"We shall be absent at least a week," said the patron, "and signs of a cordial farewell, to which Edmond replied with his
then we must run out of our course to come here and take hand only, as if he could not move the rest of his body. Then,
you up again."
when they had disappeared, he said with a smile, -- "'Tis
"Why," said Dantes, "if in two or three days you hail any strange that it should be among such men that we find
fishing-boat, desire them to come here to me. I will pay proofs of friendship and devotion." Then he dragged himself
twenty-five piastres for my passage back to Leghorn. If you cautiously to the top of a rock, from which he had a full view
do not come across one, return for me." The patron shook his of the sea, and thence he saw the tartan complete her
preparations for sailing, weigh anchor, and, balancing
head.
herself as gracefully as a water-fowl ere it takes to the wing,
"Listen, Captain Baldi; there's one way of settling this," said set sail. At the end of an hour she was completely out of
Jacopo. "Do you go, and I will stay and take care of the sight; at least, it was impossible for the wounded man to see
wounded man."
her any longer from the spot where he was. Then Dantes
"And give up your share of the venture," said Edmond, "to rose more agile and light than the kid among the myrtles
and shrubs of these wild rocks, took his gun in one hand, his
remain with me?"
pickaxe in the other, and hastened towards the rock on
"Yes," said Jacopo, "and without any hesitation."
which the marks he had noted terminated. "And now," he
"You are a good fellow and a kind-hearted messmate," exclaimed, remembering the tale of the Arabian fisherman,
replied Edmond, "and heaven will recompense you for your which Faria had related to him, "now, open sesame!"
"What are we to do, Maltese?" asked the captain. "We cannot
leave you here so, and yet we cannot stay."

83


CHAPTER 24


Chapter 24

T

THE SECRET CAVE

The Secret Cave

he sun had nearly reached the meridian, and his
scorching rays fell full on the rocks, which seemed
themselves sensible of the heat. Thousands of grasshoppers,
hidden in the bushes, chirped with a monotonous and dull
note; the leaves of the myrtle and olive trees waved and
rustled in the wind. At every step that Edmond took he
disturbed the lizards glittering with the hues of the emerald;
afar off he saw the wild goats bounding from crag to crag. In
a word, the island was inhabited, yet Edmond felt himself
alone, guided by the hand of God. He felt an indescribable
sensation somewhat akin to dread -- that dread of the
daylight which even in the desert makes us fear we are
watched and observed. This feeling was so strong that at the
moment when Edmond was about to begin his labor, he
stopped, laid down his pickaxe, seized his gun, mounted to
the summit of the highest rock, and from thence gazed
round in every direction.

had taken root, and the old rock seemed fixed to the earth.

Dantes dug away the earth carefully, and detected, or
fancied he detected, the ingenious artifice. He attacked this
wall, cemented by the hand of time, with his pickaxe. After
ten minutes' labor the wall gave way, and a hole large
enough to insert the arm was opened. Dantes went and cut
the strongest olive-tree he could find, stripped off its
branches, inserted it in the hole, and used it as a lever. But
the rock was too heavy, and too firmly wedged, to be moved
by any one man, were he Hercules himself. Dantes saw that
he must attack the wedge. But how? He cast his eyes around,
and saw the horn full of powder which his friend Jacopo had
left him. He smiled; the infernal invention would serve him
for this purpose. With the aid of his pickaxe, Dantes, after
the manner of a labor-saving pioneer, dug a mine between
the upper rock and the one that supported it, filled it with
powder, then made a match by rolling his handkerchief in
But it was not upon Corsica, the very houses of which he saltpetre. He lighted it and retired. The explosion soon
could distinguish; or on Sardinia; or on the Island of Elba, followed; the upper rock was lifted from its base by the
with its historical associations; or upon the almost terrific force of the powder; the lower one flew into pieces;
imperceptible line that to the experienced eye of a sailor thousands of insects escaped from the aperture Dantes had
alone revealed the coast of Genoa the proud, and Leghorn previously formed, and a huge snake, like the guardian
the commercial, that he gazed. It was at the brigantine that demon of the treasure, rolled himself along in darkening
had left in the morning, and the tartan that had just set sail, coils, and disappeared.
that Edmond fixed his eyes. The first was just disappearing
Dantes approached the upper rock, which now, without any
in the straits of Bonifacio; the other, following an opposite
support, leaned towards the sea. The intrepid
direction, was about to round the Island of Corsica. This
treasure-seeker walked round it, and, selecting the spot from
sight reassured him. He then looked at the objects near him.
whence it appeared most susceptible to attack, placed his
He saw that he was on the highest point of the island, -- a
lever in one of the crevices, and strained every nerve to
statue on this vast pedestal of granite, nothing human
move the mass. The rock, already shaken by the explosion,
appearing in sight, while the blue ocean beat against the base
tottered on its base. Dantes redoubled his efforts; he seemed
of the island, and covered it with a fringe of foam. Then he
like one of the ancient Titans, who uprooted the mountains
descended with cautious and slow step, for he dreaded lest
to hurl against the father of the gods. The rock yielded,
an accident similar to that he had so adroitly feigned should
rolled over, bounded from point to point, and finally
happen in reality.
disappeared in the ocean.
Dantes, as we have said, had traced the marks along the
On the spot it had occupied was a circular space, exposing
rocks, and he had noticed that they led to a small creek.
an iron ring let into a square flag-stone. Dantes uttered a cry
which was hidden like the bath of some ancient nymph. This
of joy and surprise; never had a first attempt been crowned
creek was sufficiently wide at its mouth, and deep in the
with more perfect success. He would fain have continued,
centre, to admit of the entrance of a small vessel of the
but his knees trembled, and his heart beat so violently, and
lugger class, which would be perfectly concealed from
his sight became so dim, that he was forced to pause. This
observation.
feeling lasted but for a moment. Edmond inserted his lever
Then following the clew that, in the hands of the Abbe Faria, in the ring and exerted all his strength; the flag-stone yielded,
had been so skilfully used to guide him through the and disclosed steps that descended until they were lost in
Daedalian labyrinth of probabilities, he thought that the the obscurity of a subterraneous grotto. Any one else would
Cardinal Spada, anxious not to be watched, had entered the have rushed on with a cry of joy. Dantes turned pale,
creek, concealed his little barque, followed the line marked hesitated, and reflected. "Come," said he to himself, "be a
by the notches in the rock, and at the end of it had buried his man. I am accustomed to adversity. I must not be cast down
treasure. It was this idea that had brought Dantes back to the by the discovery that I have been deceived. What, then,
circular rock. One thing only perplexed Edmond, and would be the use of all I have suffered? The heart breaks
destroyed his theory. How could this rock, which weighed when, after having been elated by flattering hopes, it sees all
several tons, have been lifted to this spot, without the aid of its illusions destroyed. Faria has dreamed this; the Cardinal
many men? Suddenly an idea flashed across his mind. Spada buried no treasure here; perhaps he never came here,
Instead of raising it, thought he, they have lowered it. And or if he did, Caesar Borgia, the intrepid adventurer, the
he sprang from the rock in order to inspect the base on stealthy and indefatigable plunderer, has followed him,
which it had formerly stood. He soon perceived that a slope discovered his traces, pursued them as I have done, raised
had been formed, and the rock had slid along this until it the stone, and descending before me, has left me nothing."
stopped at the spot it now occupied. A large stone had He remained motionless and pensive, his eyes fixed on the
served as a wedge; flints and pebbles had been inserted gloomy aperture that was open at his feet.
around it, so as to conceal the orifice; this species of masonry
"Now that I expect nothing, now that I no longer entertain
had been covered with earth, and grass and weeds had
the slightest hopes, the end of this adventure becomes
grown there, moss had clung to the stones, myrtle-bushes
84

simply a matter of curiosity." And he remained again
motionless and thoughtful.

last proof, instead of giving him fresh strength, deprived
him of it; the pickaxe descended, or rather fell; he placed it
on the ground, passed his hand over his brow, and
"Yes, yes; this is an adventure worthy a place in the varied
remounted the stairs, alleging to himself, as an excuse, a
career of that royal bandit. This fabulous event formed but a
desire to be assured that no one was watching him, but in
link in a long chain of marvels. Yes, Borgia has been here, a
reality because he felt that he was about to faint. The island
torch in one hand, a sword in the other, and within twenty
was deserted, and the sun seemed to cover it with its fiery
paces, at the foot of this rock, perhaps two guards kept
glance; afar off, a few small fishing boats studded the bosom
watch on land and sea, while their master descended, as I
of the blue ocean.
am about to descend, dispelling the darkness before his
awe-inspiring progress."
Dantes had tasted nothing, but he thought not of hunger at
such a moment; he hastily swallowed a few drops of rum,
"But what was the fate of the guards who thus possessed his
and again entered the cavern. The pickaxe that had seemed
secret?" asked Dantes of himself.
so heavy, was now like a feather in his grasp; he seized it,
"The fate," replied he, smiling, "of those who buried Alaric."
and attacked the wall. After several blows he perceived that
"Yet, had he come," thought Dantes, "he would have found the stones were not cemented, but had been merely placed
the treasure, and Borgia, he who compared Italy to an one upon the other, and covered with stucco; he inserted the
artichoke, which he could devour leaf by leaf, knew too well point of his pickaxe, and using the handle as a lever, with joy
the value of time to waste it in replacing this rock. I will go soon saw the stone turn as if on hinges, and fall at his feet.
He had nothing more to do now, but with the iron tooth of
down."
the pickaxe to draw the stones towards him one by one. The
Then he descended, a smile on his lips, and murmuring that aperture was already sufficiently large for him to enter, but
last word of human philosophy, "Perhaps!" But instead of by waiting, he could still cling to hope, and retard the
the darkness, and the thick and mephitic atmosphere he had certainty of deception. At last, after renewed hesitation,
expected to find, Dantes saw a dim and bluish light, which, Dantes entered the second grotto. The second grotto was
as well as the air, entered, not merely by the aperture he had lower and more gloomy than the first; the air that could only
just formed, but by the interstices and crevices of the rock enter by the newly formed opening had the mephitic smell
which were visible from without, and through which he Dantes was surprised not to find in the outer cavern. He
could distinguish the blue sky and the waving branches of waited in order to allow pure air to displace the foul
the evergreen oaks, and the tendrils of the creepers that grew atmosphere, and then went on. At the left of the opening
from the rocks. After having stood a few minutes in the was a dark and deep angle. But to Dantes' eye there was no
cavern, the atmosphere of which was rather warm than darkness. He glanced around this second grotto; it was, like
damp, Dantes' eye, habituated as it was to darkness, could the first, empty.
pierce even to the remotest angles of the cavern, which was
of granite that sparkled like diamonds. "Alas," said Edmond, The treasure, if it existed, was buried in this corner. The time
smiling, "these are the treasures the cardinal has left; and the had at length arrived; two feet of earth removed, and Dantes'
good abbe, seeing in a dream these glittering walls, has fate would be decided. He advanced towards the angle, and
summoning all his resolution, attacked the ground with the
indulged in fallacious hopes."
pickaxe. At the fifth or sixth blow the pickaxe struck against
But he called to mind the words of the will, which he knew an iron substance. Never did funeral knell, never did
by heart. "In the farthest angle of the second opening," said alarm-bell, produce a greater effect on the hearer. Had
the cardinal's will. He had only found the first grotto; he had Dantes found nothing he could not have become more
now to seek the second. Dantes continued his search. He ghastly pale. He again struck his pickaxe into the earth, and
reflected that this second grotto must penetrate deeper into encountered the same resistance, but not the same sound. "It
the island; he examined the stones, and sounded one part of is a casket of wood bound with iron," thought he. At this
the wall where he fancied the opening existed, masked for moment a shadow passed rapidly before the opening;
precaution's sake. The pickaxe struck for a moment with a Dantes seized his gun, sprang through the opening, and
dull sound that drew out of Dantes' forehead large drops of mounted the stair. A wild goat had passed before the mouth
perspiration. At last it seemed to him that one part of the of the cave, and was feeding at a little distance. This would
wall gave forth a more hollow and deeper echo; he eagerly have been a favorable occasion to secure his dinner; but
advanced, and with the quickness of perception that no one Dantes feared lest the report of his gun should attract
but a prisoner possesses, saw that there, in all probability, attention.
the opening must be.
He thought a moment, cut a branch of a resinous tree,
However, he, like Caesar Borgia, knew the value of time; and, lighted it at the fire at which the smugglers had prepared
in order to avoid fruitless toil, he sounded all the other walls their breakfast, and descended with this torch. He wished to
with his pickaxe, struck the earth with the butt of his gun, see everything. He approached the hole he had dug. and
and finding nothing that appeared suspicious, returned to now, with the aid of the torch, saw that his pickaxe had in
that part of the wall whence issued the consoling sound he reality struck against iron and wood. He planted his torch in
had before heard. He again struck it, and with greater force. the ground and resumed his labor. In an instant a space
Then a singular thing occurred. As he struck the wall, pieces three feet long by two feet broad was cleared, and Dantes
of stucco similar to that used in the ground work of could see an oaken coffer, bound with cut steel; in the
arabesques broke off, and fell to the ground in flakes, middle of the lid he saw engraved on a silver plate, which
exposing a large white stone. The aperture of the rock had was still untarnished, the arms of the Spada family -- viz., a
been closed with stones, then this stucco had been applied, sword, pale, on an oval shield, like all the Italian armorial
and painted to imitate granite. Dantes struck with the sharp bearings, and surmounted by a cardinal's hat; Dantes easily
end of his pickaxe, which entered someway between the recognized them, Faria had so often drawn them for him.
interstices. It was there he must dig. But by some strange There was no longer any doubt: the treasure was there -- no
play of emotion, in proportion as the proofs that Faria, had one would have been at such pains to conceal an empty
not been deceived became stronger, so did his heart give casket. In an instant he had cleared every obstacle away, and
way, and a feeling of discouragement stole over him. This he saw successively the lock, placed between two padlocks,
85


CHAPTER 24


THE SECRET CAVE

and the two handles at each end, all carved as things were
carved at that epoch, when art rendered the commonest
metals precious. Dantes seized the handles, and strove to lift
the coffer; it was impossible. He sought to open it; lock and
padlock were fastened; these faithful guardians seemed
unwilling to surrender their trust. Dantes inserted the sharp
end of the pickaxe between the coffer and the lid, and
pressing with all his force on the handle, burst open the
fastenings. The hinges yielded in their turn and fell, still
holding in their grasp fragments of the wood, and the chest
was open.

He would fain have gazed upon his gold, and yet he had not
strength enough; for an instant he leaned his head in his
hands as if to prevent his senses from leaving him, and then
rushed madly about the rocks of Monte Cristo, terrifying the
wild goats and scaring the sea-fowls with his wild cries and
gestures; then he returned, and, still unable to believe the
evidence of his senses, rushed into the grotto, and found
himself before this mine of gold and jewels. This time he fell
on his knees, and, clasping his hands convulsively, uttered a
prayer intelligible to God alone. He soon became calmer and
more happy, for only now did he begin to realize his felicity.
He then set himself to work to count his fortune. There were
a thousand ingots of gold, each weighing from two to three
pounds; then he piled up twenty-five thousand crowns, each
worth about eighty francs of our money, and bearing the
effigies of Alexander VI. and his predecessors; and he saw
that the complement was not half empty. And he measured
ten double handfuls of pearls, diamonds, and other gems,
many of which, mounted by the most famous workmen,
were valuable beyond their intrinsic worth. Dantes saw the
light gradually disappear, and fearing to be surprised in the
cavern, left it, his gun in his hand. A piece of biscuit and a
small quantity of rum formed his supper, and he snatched a
few hours' sleep, lying over the mouth of the cave.

Edmond was seized with vertigo; he cocked his gun and laid
it beside him. He then closed his eyes as children do in order
that they may see in the resplendent night of their own
imagination more stars than are visible in the firmament;
then he re-opened them, and stood motionless with
amazement. Three compartments divided the coffer. In the
first, blazed piles of golden coin; in the second, were ranged
bars of unpolished gold, which possessed nothing attractive
save their value; in the third, Edmond grasped handfuls of
diamonds, pearls, and rubies, which, as they fell on one
another, sounded like hail against glass. After having
touched, felt, examined these treasures, Edmond rushed
through the caverns like a man seized with frenzy; he leaped
on a rock, from whence he could behold the sea. He was It was a night of joy and terror, such as this man of
alone -- alone with these countless, these unheard-of stupendous emotions had already experienced twice or
treasures! Was he awake, or was it but a dream?
thrice in his lifetime.

86


Chapter 25

D

ay, for which Dantes had so eagerly and impatiently
waited with open eyes, again dawned. With the first
light Dantes resumed his search. Again he climbed the rocky
height he had ascended the previous evening, and strained
his view to catch every peculiarity of the landscape; but it
wore the same wild, barren aspect when seen by the rays of
the morning sun which it had done when surveyed by the
fading glimmer of eve. Descending into the grotto, he lifted
the stone, filled his pockets with gems, put the box together
as well and securely as he could, sprinkled fresh sand over
the spot from which it had been taken, and then carefully
trod down the earth to give it everywhere a uniform
appearance; then, quitting the grotto, he replaced the stone,
heaping on it broken masses of rocks and rough fragments
of crumbling granite, filling the interstices with earth, into
which he deftly inserted rapidly growing plants, such as the
wild myrtle and flowering thorn, then carefully watering
these new plantations, he scrupulously effaced every trace of
footsteps, leaving the approach to the cavern as
savage-looking and untrodden as he had found it. This done,
he impatiently awaited the return of his companions. To
wait at Monte Cristo for the purpose of watching like a
dragon over the almost incalculable richs that had thus fallen
into his possession satisfied not the cravings of his heart,
which yearned to return to dwell among mankind, and to
assume the rank, power, and influence which are always
accorded to wealth -- that first and greatest of all the forces
within the grasp of man.
On the sixth day, the smugglers returned. From a distance
Dantes recognized the rig and handling of The Young
Amelia, and dragging himself with affected difficulty
towards the landing-place, he met his companions with an
assurance that, although considerably better than when they
quitted him, he still suffered acutely from his late accident.
He then inquired how they had fared in their trip. To this
question the smugglers replied that, although successful in
landing their cargo in safety, they had scarcely done so when
they received intelligence that a guard-ship had just quitted
the port of Toulon and was crowding all sail towards them.
This obliged them to make all the speed they could to evade
the enemy, when they could but lament the absence of
Dantes, whose superior skill in the management of a vessel
would have availed them so materially. In fact, the pursuing
vessel had almost overtaken them when, fortunately, night
came on, and enabled them to double the Cape of Corsica,
and so elude all further pursuit. Upon the whole, however,
the trip had been sufficiently successful to satisfy all
concerned; while the crew, and particularly Jacopo,
expressed great regrets that Dantes had not been an equal
sharer with themselves in the profits, which amounted to no
less a sum than fifty piastres each.

The Unknown
but the cunning purchaser asked no troublesome questions
concerning a bargain by which he gained a round profit of at
least eighty per cent.
The following day Dantes presented Jacopo with an entirely
new vessel, accompanying the gift by a donation of one
hundred piastres, that he might provide himself with a
suitable crew and other requisites for his outfit, upon
condition that he would go at once to Marseilles for the
purpose of inquiring after an old man named Louis Dantes,
residing in the Allees de Meillan, and also a young woman
called Mercedes, an inhabitant of the Catalan village. Jacopo
could scarcely believe his senses at receiving this
magnificent present, which Dantes hastened to account for
by saying that he had merely been a sailor from whim and a
desire to spite his family, who did not allow him as much
money as he liked to spend; but that on his arrival at
Leghorn he had come into possession of a large fortune, left
him by an uncle, whose sole heir he was. The superior
education of Dantes gave an air of such extreme probability
to this statement that it never once occurred to Jacopo to
doubt its accuracy. The term for which Edmond had
engaged to serve on board The Young Amelia having
expired, Dantes took leave of the captain, who at first tried
all his powers of persuasion to induce him to remain as one
of the crew, but having been told the history of the legacy, he
ceased to importune him further. The following morning
Jacopo set sail for Marseilles, with directions from Dantes to
join him at the Island of Monte Cristo.

Having seen Jacopo fairly out of the harbor, Dantes
proceeded to make his final adieus on board The Young
Amelia, distributing so liberal a gratuity among her crew as
to secure for him the good wishes of all, and expressions of
cordial interest in all that concerned him. To the captain he
promised to write when he had made up his mind as to his
future plans. Then Dantes departed for Genoa. At the
moment of his arrival a small yacht was under trial in the
bay; this yacht had been built by order of an Englishman,
who, having heard that the Genoese excelled all other
builders along the shores of the Mediterranean in the
construction of fast-sailing vessels, was desirous of
possessing a specimen of their skill; the price agreed upon
between the Englishman and the Genoese builder was forty
thousand francs. Dantes, struck with the beauty and
capability of the little vessel, applied to its owner to transfer
it to him, offering sixty thousand francs, upon condition that
he should be allowed to take immediate possession. The
proposal was too advantageous to be refused, the more so as
the person for whom the yacht was intended had gone upon
a tour through Switzerland, and was not expected back in
less than three weeks or a month, by which time the builder
reckoned upon being able to complete another. A bargain
Edmond preserved the most admirable self-command, not was therefore struck. Dantes led the owner of the yacht to
suffering the faintest indication of a smile to escape him at the dwelling of a Jew; retired with the latter for a few
the enumeration of all the benefits he would have reaped minutes to a small back parlor, and upon their return the Jew
had he been able to quit the island; but as The Young Amelia counted out to the shipbuilder the sum of sixty thousand
had merely come to Monte Cristo to fetch him away, he francs in bright gold pieces.
embarked that same evening, and proceeded with the
The delighted builder then offered his services in providing
captain to Leghorn. Arrived at Leghorn, he repaired to the
a suitable crew for the little vessel, but this Dantes declined
house of a Jew, a dealer in precious stones, to whom he
with many thanks, saying he was accustomed to cruise about
disposed of four of his smallest diamonds for five thousand
quite alone, and his principal pleasure consisted in
francs each. Dantes half feared that such valuable jewels in
managing his yacht himself; the only thing the builder could
the hands of a poor sailor like himself might excite suspicion;
oblige him in would be to contrive a sort of secret closet in
87


CHAPTER 25

the cabin at his bed's head, the closet to contain three
divisions, so constructed as to be concealed from all but
himself. The builder cheerfully undertook the commission,
and promised to have these secret places completed by the
next day, Dantes furnishing the dimensions and plan in
accordance with which they were to be constructed.
The following day Dantes sailed with his yacht from Genoa,
under the inspection of an immense crowd drawn together
by curiosity to see the rich Spanish nobleman who preferred
managing his own yacht. But their wonder was soon
changed to admiration at seeing the perfect skill with which
Dantes handled the helm. The boat, indeed, seemed to be
animated with almost human intelligence, so promptly did it
obey the slightest touch; and Dantes required but a short
trial of his beautiful craft to acknowledge that the Genoese
had not without reason attained their high reputation in the
art of shipbuilding. The spectators followed the little vessel
with their eyes as long as it remained visible; they then
turned their conjectures upon her probable destination.
Some insisted she was making for Corsica, others the Island
of Elba; bets were offered to any amount that she was bound
for Spain; while Africa was positively reported by many
persons as her intended course; but no one thought of Monte
Cristo. Yet thither it was that Dantes guided his vessel, and
at Monte Cristo he arrived at the close of the second day; his
boat had proved herself a first-class sailer, and had come the
distance from Genoa in thirty-five hours. Dantes had
carefully noted the general appearance of the shore, and,
instead of landing at the usual place, he dropped anchor in
the little creek. The island was utterly deserted, and bore no
evidence of having been visited since he went away; his
treasure was just as he had left it. Early on the following
morning he commenced the removal of his riches, and ere
nightfall the whole of his immense wealth was safely
deposited in the compartments of the secret locker.
A week passed by. Dantes employed it in manoeuvring his
yacht round the island, studying it as a skilful horseman
would the animal he destined for some important service, till
at the end of that time he was perfectly conversant with its
good and bad qualities. The former Dantes proposed to
augment, the latter to remedy.
Upon the eighth day he discerned a small vessel under full
sail approaching Monte Cristo. As it drew near, he
recognized it as the boat he had given to Jacopo. He
immediately signalled it. His signal was returned, and in
two hours afterwards the newcomer lay at anchor beside the
yacht. A mournful answer awaited each of Edmond's eager
inquiries as to the information Jacopo had obtained. Old
Dantes was dead, and Mercedes had disappeared. Dantes
listened to these melancholy tidings with outward calmness;
but, leaping lightly ashore, he signified his desire to be quite
alone. In a couple of hours he returned. Two of the men from
Jacopo's boat came on board the yacht to assist in navigating
it, and he gave orders that she should be steered direct to
Marseilles. For his father's death he was in some manner
prepared; but he knew not how to account for the
mysterious disappearance of Mercedes.

THE UNKNOWN
departure for the Chateau d'If, he had been put on board the
boat destined to convey him thither. Still Dantes could not
view without a shudder the approach of a gendarme who
accompanied the officers deputed to demand his bill of
health ere the yacht was permitted to hold communication
with the shore; but with that perfect self-possession he had
acquired during his acquaintance with Faria, Dantes coolly
presented an English passport he had obtained from
Leghorn, and as this gave him a standing which a French
passport would not have afforded, he was informed that
there existed no obstacle to his immediate debarkation.
The first person to attract the attention of Dantes, as he
landed on the Canebiere, was one of the crew belonging to
the Pharaon. Edmond welcomed the meeting with this
fellow -- who had been one of his own sailors -- as a sure
means of testing the extent of the change which time had
worked in his own appearance. Going straight towards him,
he propounded a variety of questions on different subjects,
carefully watching the man's countenance as he did so; but
not a word or look implied that he had the slightest idea of
ever having seen before the person with whom he was then
conversing. Giving the sailor a piece of money in return for
his civility, Dantes proceeded onwards; but ere he had gone
many steps he heard the man loudly calling him to stop.
Dantes instantly turned to meet him. "I beg your pardon,
sir," said the honest fellow, in almost breathless haste, "but I
believe you made a mistake; you intended to give me a
two-franc piece, and see, you gave me a double Napoleon."
"Thank you, my good friend. I see that I have made a trifling
mistake, as you say; but by way of rewarding your honesty I
give you another double Napoleon, that you may drink to
my health, and be able to ask your messmates to join you."
So extreme was the surprise of the sailor, that he was unable
even to thank Edmond, whose receding figure he continued
to gaze after in speechless astonishment. "Some nabob from
India," was his comment.
Dantes, meanwhile, went on his way. Each step he trod
oppressed his heart with fresh emotion; his first and most
indelible recollections were there; not a tree, not a street, that
he passed but seemed filled with dear and cherished
memories. And thus he proceeded onwards till he arrived at
the end of the Rue de Noailles, from whence a full view of
the Allees de Meillan was obtained. At this spot, so pregnant
with fond and filial remembrances, his heart beat almost to
bursting, his knees tottered under him, a mist floated over
his sight, and had he not clung for support to one of the trees,
he would inevitably have fallen to the ground and been
crushed beneath the many vehicles continually passing there.
Recovering himself, however, he wiped the perspiration
from his brows, and stopped not again till he found himself
at the door of the house in which his father had lived.

The nasturtiums and other plants, which his father had
delighted to train before his window, had all disappeared
from the upper part of the house. Leaning against the tree,
he gazed thoughtfully for a time at the upper stories of the
shabby little house. Then he advanced to the door, and asked
whether there were any rooms to be let. Though answered in
Without divulging his secret, Dantes could not give
the negative, he begged so earnestly to be permitted to visit
sufficiently clear instructions to an agent. There were,
those on the fifth floor, that, in spite of the oft-repeated
besides, other particulars he was desirous of ascertaining,
assurance of the concierge that they were occupied, Dantes
and those were of a nature he alone could investigate in a
succeeded in inducing the man to go up to the tenants, and
manner satisfactory to himself. His looking-glass had
ask permission for a gentleman to be allowed to look at
assured him, during his stay at Leghorn, that he ran no risk
them.
of recognition; moreover, he had now the means of adopting
any disguise he thought proper. One fine morning, then, his The tenants of the humble lodging were a young couple who
yacht, followed by the little fishing-boat, boldly entered the had been scarcely married a week; and seeing them, Dantes
port of Marseilles, and anchored exactly opposite the spot sighed heavily. Nothing in the two small chambers forming
from whence, on the never-to-be-forgotten night of his the apartments remained as it had been in the time of the
88

elder Dantes; the very paper was different, while the articles
of antiquated furniture with which the rooms had been filled
in Edmond's time had all disappeared; the four walls alone
remained as he had left them. The bed belonging to the
present occupants was placed as the former owner of the
chamber had been accustomed to have his; and, in spite of
his efforts to prevent it, the eyes of Edmond were suffused in
tears as he reflected that on that spot the old man had
breathed his last, vainly calling for his son. The young
couple gazed with astonishment at the sight of their visitor's
emotion, and wondered to see the large tears silently chasing
each other down his otherwise stern and immovable features;
but they felt the sacredness of his grief, and kindly refrained
from questioning him as to its cause, while, with instinctive
delicacy, they left him to indulge his sorrow alone. When he
withdrew from the scene of his painful recollections, they
both accompanied him downstairs, reiterating their hope
that he would come again whenever he pleased, and
assuring him that their poor dwelling would ever be open to
him. As Edmond passed the door on the fourth floor, he
paused to inquire whether Caderousse the tailor still dwelt
there; but he received, for reply, that the person in question
had got into difficulties, and at the present time kept a small
inn on the route from Bellegarde to Beaucaire.

least ten thousand more than it was worth; but had its owner
asked half a million, it would unhesitatingly have been given.
The very same day the occupants of the apartments on the
fifth floor of the house, now become the property of Dantes,
were duly informed by the notary who had arranged the
necessary transfer of deeds, etc., that the new landlord gave
them their choice of any of the rooms in the house, without
the least augmentation of rent, upon condition of their
giving instant possession of the two small chambers they at
present inhabited.

This strange event aroused great wonder and curiosity in the
neighborhood of the Allees de Meillan, and a multitude of
theories were afloat, none of which was anywhere near the
truth. But what raised public astonishment to a climax, and
set all conjecture at defiance, was the knowledge that the
same stranger who had in the morning visited the Allees de
Meillan had been seen in the evening walking in the little
village of the Catalans, and afterwards observed to enter a
poor fisherman's hut, and to pass more than an hour in
inquiring after persons who had either been dead or gone
away for more than fifteen or sixteen years. But on the
following day the family from whom all these particulars
had been asked received a handsome present, consisting of
an entirely new fishing-boat, with two seines and a tender.
Having obtained the address of the person to whom the The delighted recipients of these munificent gifts would
house in the Allees de Meillan belonged, Dantes next gladly have poured out their thanks to their generous
proceeded thither, and, under the name of Lord Wilmore benefactor, but they had seen him, upon quitting the hut,
(the name and title inscribed on his passport), purchased the merely give some orders to a sailor, and then springing
small dwelling for the sum of twenty-five thousand francs, at lightly on horseback, leave Marseilles by the Porte d'Aix.

89


CHAPTER 26


Chapter 26

THE PONT DU GARD INN

The Pont Du Gard Inn

S

uch of my readers as have made a pedestrian excursion
to the south of France may perchance have noticed, about
midway between the town of Beaucaire and the village of
Bellegarde, -- a little nearer to the former than to the latter, -a small roadside inn, from the front of which hung, creaking
and flapping in the wind, a sheet of tin covered with a
grotesque representation of the Pont du Gard. This modern
place of entertainment stood on the left-hand side of the post
road, and backed upon the Rhone. It also boasted of what in
Languedoc is styled a garden, consisting of a small plot of
ground, on the side opposite to the main entrance reserved
for the reception of guests. A few dingy olives and stunted
fig-trees struggled hard for existence, but their withered
dusty foliage abundantly proved how unequal was the
conflict. Between these sickly shrubs grew a scanty supply of
garlic, tomatoes, and eschalots; while, lone and solitary, like
a forgotten sentinel, a tall pine raised its melancholy head in
one of the corners of this unattractive spot, and displayed its
flexible stem and fan-shaped summit dried and cracked by
the fierce heat of the sub-tropical sun.
In the surrounding plain, which more resembled a dusty
lake than solid ground, were scattered a few miserable stalks
of wheat, the effect, no doubt, of a curious desire on the part
of the agriculturists of the country to see whether such a
thing as the raising of grain in those parched regions was
practicable. Each stalk served as a perch for a grasshopper,
which regaled the passers by through this Egyptian scene
with its strident, monotonous note.

For about seven or eight years the little tavern had been kept
by a man and his wife, with two servants, -- a chambermaid
named Trinette, and a hostler called Pecaud. This small staff
was quite equal to all the requirements, for a canal between
Beaucaire
and
Aiguemortes
had
revolutionized
transportation by substituting boats for the cart and the
stagecoach. And, as though to add to the daily misery which
this prosperous canal inflicted on the unfortunate inn-keeper,
whose utter ruin it was fast accomplishing, it was situated
between the Rhone from which it had its source and the
post-road it had depleted, not a hundred steps from the inn,
of which we have given a brief but faithful description.
The inn-keeper himself was a man of from forty to fifty-five
years of age, tall, strong, and bony, a perfect specimen of the
natives of those southern latitudes; he had dark, sparkling,
and deep-set eyes, hooked nose, and teeth white as those of a
carnivorous animal; his hair, like his beard, which he wore
under his chin, was thick and curly, and in spite of his age
but slightly interspersed with a few silvery threads. His
naturally dark complexion had assumed a still further shade
of brown from the habit the unfortunate man had acquired
of stationing himself from morning till eve at the threshold
of his door, on the lookout for guests who seldom came, yet
there he stood, day after day, exposed to the meridional rays
of a burning sun, with no other protection for his head than
a red handkerchief twisted around it, after the manner of the
Spanish muleteers. This man was our old acquaintance,
Gaspard Caderousse. His wife, on the contrary, whose
maiden name had been Madeleine Radelle, was pale, meagre,
and sickly-looking. Born in the neighborhood of Arles, she
had shared in the beauty for which its women are proverbial;
but that beauty had gradually withered beneath the
devastating influence of the slow fever so prevalent among
dwellers by the ponds of Aiguemortes and the marshes of
90

Camargue. She remained nearly always in her second-floor
chamber, shivering in her chair, or stretched languid and
feeble on her bed, while her husband kept his daily watch at
the door -- a duty he performed with so much the greater
willingness, as it saved him the necessity of listening to the
endless plaints and murmurs of his helpmate, who never
saw him without breaking out into bitter invectives against
fate; to all of which her husband would calmly return an
unvarying reply, in these philosophic words: -"Hush, La Carconte. It is God's pleasure that things should
be so."
The sobriquet of La Carconte had been bestowed on
Madeleine Radelle from the fact that she had been born in a
village, so called, situated between Salon and Lambesc; and
as a custom existed among the inhabitants of that part of
France where Caderousse lived of styling every person by
some particular and distinctive appellation, her husband had
bestowed on her the name of La Carconte in place of her
sweet and euphonious name of Madeleine, which, in all
probability, his rude gutteral language would not have
enabled him to pronounce. Still, let it not be supposed that
amid this affected resignation to the will of Providence, the
unfortunate inn-keeper did not writhe under the double
misery of seeing the hateful canal carry off his customers and
his profits, and the daily infliction of his peevish partner's
murmurs and lamentations.
Like other dwellers in the south, he was a man of sober
habits and moderate desires, but fond of external show, vain,
and addicted to display. During the days of his prosperity,
not a festivity took place without himself and wife being
among the spectators. He dressed in the picturesque
costume worn upon grand occasions by the inhabitants of
the south of France, bearing equal resemblance to the style
adopted both by the Catalans and Andalusians; while La
Carconte displayed the charming fashion prevalent among
the women of Arles, a mode of attire borrowed equally from
Greece and Arabia. But, by degrees, watch-chains, necklaces,
parti-colored scarfs, embroidered bodices, velvet vests,
elegantly worked stockings, striped gaiters, and silver
buckles for the shoes, all disappeared; and Gaspard
Caderousse, unable to appear abroad in his pristine splendor,
had given up any further participation in the pomps and
vanities, both for himself and wife, although a bitter feeling
of envious discontent filled his mind as the sound of mirth
and merry music from the joyous revellers reached even the
miserable hostelry to which he still clung, more for the
shelter than the profit it afforded.
Caderousse, then, was, as usual, at his place of observation
before the door, his eyes glancing listlessly from a piece of
closely shaven grass -- on which some fowls were
industriously, though fruitlessly, endeavoring to turn up
some grain or insect suited to their palate -- to the deserted
road, which led away to the north and south, when he was
aroused by the shrill voice of his wife, and grumbling to
himself as he went, he mounted to her chamber, first taking
care, however, to set the entrance door wide open, as an
invitation to any chance traveller who might be passing.
At the moment Caderousse quitted his sentry-like watch
before the door, the road on which he so eagerly strained his
sight was void and lonely as a desert at mid-day. There it lay
stretching out into one interminable line of dust and sand,

with its sides bordered by tall, meagre trees, altogether
presenting so uninviting an appearance, that no one in his
senses could have imagined that any traveller, at liberty to
regulate his hours for journeying, would choose to expose
himself in such a formidable Sahara. Nevertheless, had
Caderousse but retained his post a few minutes longer, he
might have caught a dim outline of something approaching
from the direction of Bellegarde; as the moving object drew
nearer, he would easily have perceived that it consisted of a
man and horse, between whom the kindest and most
amiable understanding appeared to exist. The horse was of
Hungarian breed, and ambled along at an easy pace. His
rider was a priest, dressed in black, and wearing a
three-cornered hat; and, spite of the ardent rays of a
noonday sun, the pair came on with a fair degree of rapidity.

"Yes; let me have a bottle of your best wine, and then, with
your permission, we will resume our conversation from
where we left off."

"As you please, sir," said Caderousse, who, anxious not to
lose the present opportunity of finding a customer for one of
the few bottles of Cahors still remaining in his possession,
hastily raised a trap-door in the floor of the apartment they
were in, which served both as parlor and kitchen. Upon
issuing forth from his subterranean retreat at the expiration
of five minutes, he found the abbe seated upon a wooden
stool, leaning his elbow on a table, while Margotin, whose
animosity seemed appeased by the unusual command of the
traveller for refreshments, had crept up to him, and had
established himself very comfortably between his knees, his
Having arrived before the Pont du Gard, the horse stopped,
long, skinny neck resting on his lap, while his dim eye was
but whether for his own pleasure or that of his rider would
fixed earnestly on the traveller's face.
have been difficult to say. However that might have been,
the priest, dismounting, led his steed by the bridle in search "Are you quite alone?" inquired the guest, as Caderousse
of some place to which he could secure him. Availing placed before him the bottle of wine and a glass.
himself of a handle that projected from a half-fallen door, he "Quite, quite alone," replied the man -- "or, at least,
tied the animal safely and having drawn a red cotton practically so, for my poor wife, who is the only person in
handkerchief, from his pocket, wiped away the perspiration the house besides myself, is laid up with illness, and unable
that streamed from his brow, then, advancing to the door, to render me the least assistance, poor thing!"
struck thrice with the end of his iron-shod stick. At this
unusual sound, a huge black dog came rushing to meet the "You are married, then?" said the priest, with a show of
daring assailant of his ordinarily tranquil abode, snarling interest, glancing round as he spoke at the scanty furnishings
and displaying his sharp white teeth with a determined of the apartment.
hostility that abundantly proved how little he was "Ah, sir," said Caderousse with a sigh, "it is easy to perceive I
accustomed to society. At that moment a heavy footstep was am not a rich man; but in this world a man does not thrive
heard descending the wooden staircase that led from the the better for being honest." The abbe fixed on him a
upper floor, and, with many bows and courteous smiles, searching, penetrating glance.
mine host of the Pont du Gard besought his guest to enter.
"Yes, honest -- I can certainly say that much for myself,"
"You are welcome, sir, most welcome!" repeated the continued the inn-keeper, fairly sustaining the scrutiny of
astonished Caderousse. "Now, then, Margotin," cried he, the abbe's gaze; "I can boast with truth of being an honest
speaking to the dog, "will you be quiet? Pray don't heed him, man; and," continued he significantly, with a hand on his
sir! -- he only barks, he never bites. I make no doubt a glass breast and shaking his head, "that is more than every one can
of good wine would be acceptable this dreadfully hot day." say nowadays."
Then perceiving for the first time the garb of the traveller he
"So much the better for you, if what you assert be true," said
had to entertain, Caderousse hastily exclaimed: "A thousand
the abbe; "for I am firmly persuaded that, sooner or later, the
pardons! I really did not observe whom I had the honor to
good will be rewarded, and the wicked punished."
receive under my poor roof. What would the abbe please to
have? What refreshment can I offer? All I have is at his "Such words as those belong to your profession," answered
Caderousse, "and you do well to repeat them; but," added he,
service."
with a bitter expression of countenance, "one is free to
The priest gazed on the person addressing him with a long
believe them or not, as one pleases."
and searching gaze -- there even seemed a disposition on his
part to court a similar scrutiny on the part of the inn-keeper; "You are wrong to speak thus," said the abbe; "and perhaps I
then, observing in the countenance of the latter no other may, in my own person, be able to prove to you how
expression than extreme surprise at his own want of completely you are in error."
attention to an inquiry so courteously worded, he deemed it "What mean you?" inquired Caderousse with a look of
as well to terminate this dumb show, and therefore said, surprise.
speaking with a strong Italian accent, "You are, I presume, M.
"In the first place, I must be satisfied that you are the person
Caderousse?"
I am in search of."
"Yes, sir," answered the host, even more surprised at the
question than he had been by the silence which had "What proofs do you require?"
preceded it; "I am Gaspard Caderousse, at your service."
"Gaspard Caderousse," rejoined the priest. "Yes, -- Christian
and surname are the same. You formerly lived, I believe in
the Allees de Meillan, on the fourth floor?"
"I did."
"And you followed the business of a tailor?"
"True, I was a tailor, till the trade fell off. It is so hot at
Marseilles, that really I believe that the respectable
inhabitants will in time go without any clothing whatever.
But talking of heat, is there nothing I can offer you by way of
refreshment?"

"Did you, in the year 1814 or 1815, know anything of a
young sailor named Dantes?"
"Dantes? Did I know poor dear Edmond? Why, Edmond
Dantes and myself were intimate friends!" exclaimed
Caderousse, whose countenance flushed darkly as he caught
the penetrating gaze of the abbe fixed on him, while the clear,
calm eye of the questioner seemed to dilate with feverish
scrutiny.
"You remind me," said the priest, "that the young man
concerning whom I asked you was said to bear the name of
Edmond."
91


CHAPTER 26


THE PONT DU GARD INN

"Said to bear the name!" repeated Caderousse, becoming
excited and eager. "Why, he was so called as truly as I myself
bore the appellation of Gaspard Caderousse; but tell me, I
pray, what has become of poor Edmond? Did you know him?
Is he alive and at liberty? Is he prosperous and happy?"
"He died a more wretched, hopeless, heart-broken prisoner
than the felons who pay the penalty of their crimes at the
galleys of Toulon."

wherewithal to live, for the sale of such a diamond would
have quite sufficed to make his fortune."
"Then, I suppose," asked Caderousse, with eager, glowing
looks, "that it was a stone of immense value?"
"Why, everything is relative," answered the abbe. "To one in
Edmond's position the diamond certainly was of great value.
It was estimated at fifty thousand francs."

"Bless me!" exclaimed Caderousse, "fifty thousand francs!
A deadly pallor followed the flush on the countenance of
Surely the diamond was as large as a nut to be worth all
Caderousse, who turned away, and the priest saw him
that."
wiping the tears from his eyes with the corner of the red
"No," replied the abbe, "it was not of such a size as that; but
handkerchief twisted round his head.
you shall judge for yourself. I have it with me."
"Poor fellow, poor fellow!" murmured Caderousse. "Well,
there, sir, is another proof that good people are never The sharp gaze of Caderousse was instantly directed
rewarded on this earth, and that none but the wicked towards the priest's garments, as though hoping to discover
prosper. Ah," continued Caderousse, speaking in the highly the location of the treasure. Calmly drawing forth from his
colored language of the south, "the world grows worse and pocket a small box covered with black shagreen, the abbe
worse. Why does not God, if he really hates the wicked, as opened it, and displayed to the dazzled eyes of Caderousse
he is said to do, send down brimstone and fire, and consume the sparkling jewel it contained, set in a ring of admirable
workmanship. "And that diamond," cried Caderousse,
them altogether?"
almost breathless with eager admiration, "you say, is worth
"You speak as though you had loved this young Dantes,"
fifty thousand francs?"
observed the abbe, without taking any notice of his
"It is, without the setting, which is also valuable," replied the
companion's vehemence.
abbe, as he closed the box, and returned it to his pocket,
"And so I did," replied Caderousse; "though once, I confess, I
while its brilliant hues seemed still to dance before the eyes
envied him his good fortune. But I swear to you, sir, I swear
of the fascinated inn-keeper.
to you, by everything a man holds dear, I have, since then,
deeply and sincerely lamented his unhappy fate." There was "But how comes the diamond in your possession, sir? Did
a brief silence, during which the fixed, searching eye of the Edmond make you his heir?"
abbe was employed in scrutinizing the agitated features of "No, merely his testamentary executor. `I once possessed
the inn-keeper.
four dear and faithful friends, besides the maiden to whom I
"You knew the poor lad, then?" continued Caderousse.
"I was called to see him on his dying bed, that I might
administer to him the consolations of religion."

was betrothed' he said; `and I feel convinced they have all
unfeignedly grieved over my loss. The name of one of the
four friends is Caderousse.'" The inn-keeper shivered.

"`Another of the number,'" continued the abbe, without
seeming to notice the emotion of Caderousse, "`is called
Danglars; and the third, in spite of being my rival,
"Of what, think you, do young and strong men die in prison, entertained a very sincere affection for me.'" A fiendish smile
when they have scarcely numbered their thirtieth year, played over the features of Caderousse, who was about to
unless it be of imprisonment?" Caderousse wiped away the break in upon the abbe's speech, when the latter, waving his
large beads of perspiration that gathered on his brow.
hand, said, "Allow me to finish first, and then if you have
any observations to make, you can do so afterwards. `The
"But the strangest part of the story is," resumed the abbe,
third of my friends, although my rival, was much attached to
"that Dantes, even in his dying moments, swore by his
me, -- his name was Fernand; that of my betrothed was' -crucified Redeemer, that he was utterly ignorant of the cause
Stay, stay," continued the abbe, "I have forgotten what he
of his detention."
called her."
"And so he was," murmured Caderousse. "How should he
"Mercedes," said Caderousse eagerly.
have been otherwise? Ah, sir, the poor fellow told you the
truth."
"True," said the abbe, with a stifled sigh, "Mercedes it was."
"And of what did he die?" asked Caderousse in a choking
voice.

"And for that reason, he besought me to try and clear up a "Go on," urged Caderousse.
mystery he had never been able to penetrate, and to clear his
"Bring me a carafe of water," said the abbe.
memory should any foul spot or stain have fallen on it."
Caderousse quickly performed the stranger's bidding; and
And here the look of the abbe, becoming more and more
after pouring some into a glass, and slowly swallowing its
fixed, seemed to rest with ill-concealed satisfaction on the
contents, the abbe, resuming his usual placidity of manner,
gloomy depression which was rapidly spreading over the
said, as he placed his empty glass on the table, -- "Where did
countenance of Caderousse.
we leave off?"
"A rich Englishman," continued the abbe, "who had been his
"The name of Edmond's betrothed was Mercedes."
companion in misfortune, but had been released from prison
during the second restoration, was possessed of a diamond "To be sure. `You will go to Marseilles,' said Dantes, -- for
of immense value; this jewel he bestowed on Dantes upon you understand, I repeat his words just as he uttered them.
himself quitting the prison, as a mark of his gratitude for the Do you understand?"
kindness and brotherly care with which Dantes had nursed "Perfectly."
him in a severe illness he underwent during his confinement.
Instead of employing this diamond in attempting to bribe his "`You will sell this diamond; you will divide the money into
jailers, who might only have taken it and then betrayed him five equal parts, and give an equal portion to these good
to the governor, Dantes carefully preserved it, that in the friends, the only persons who have loved me upon earth.'"
event of his getting out of prison he might have
92

"But why into five parts?" asked Caderousse; "you only
mentioned four persons."

occasioned by my instrumentality, that I solemnly promise
you."

"Because the fifth is dead, as I hear. The fifth sharer in
Edmond's bequest, was his own father."

La Carconte muttered a few inarticulate words, then let her
head again drop upon her knees, and went into a fit of ague,
leaving the two speakers to resume the conversation, but
"Too true, too true!" ejaculated Caderousse, almost
remaining so as to be able to hear every word they uttered.
suffocated by the contending passions which assailed him,
Again the abbe had been obliged to swallow a draught of
"the poor old man did die."
water to calm the emotions that threatened to overpower
"I learned so much at Marseilles," replied the abbe, making a him. When he had sufficiently recovered himself, he said, "It
strong effort to appear indifferent; "but from the length of appears, then, that the miserable old man you were telling
time that has elapsed since the death of the elder Dantes, I me of was forsaken by every one. Surely, had not such been
was unable to obtain any particulars of his end. Can you the case, he would not have perished by so dreadful a
enlighten me on that point?"
death."
"I do not know who could if I could not," said Caderousse.
"Why, I lived almost on the same floor with the poor old
man. Ah, yes, about a year after the disappearance of his son
the poor old man died."
"Of what did he die?"
"Why, the doctors called his complaint gastro-enteritis, I
believe; his acquaintances say he died of grief; but I, who
saw him in his dying moments, I say he died of" -Caderousse paused.

"Why, he was not altogether forsaken," continued
Caderousse, "for Mercedes the Catalan and Monsieur Morrel
were very kind to him; but somehow the poor old man had
contracted a profound hatred for Fernand -- the very
person," added Caderousse with a bitter smile, "that you
named just now as being one of Dantes' faithful and attached
friends."
"And was he not so?" asked the abbe.

"Gaspard, Gaspard!" murmured the woman, from her seat
on the stairs, "mind what you are saying!" Caderousse made
"Of what?" asked the priest, anxiously and eagerly.
no reply to these words, though evidently irritated and
"Why, of downright starvation."
annoyed by the interruption, but, addressing the abbe, said,
"Starvation!" exclaimed the abbe, springing from his seat. "Can a man be faithful to another whose wife he covets and
"Why, the vilest animals are not suffered to die by such a desires for himself? But Dantes was so honorable and true in
death as that. The very dogs that wander houseless and his own nature, that he believed everybody's professions of
homeless in the streets find some pitying hand to cast them a friendship. Poor Edmond, he was cruelly deceived; but it
mouthful of bread; and that a man, a Christian, should be was fortunate that he never knew, or he might have found it
allowed to perish of hunger in the midst of other men who more difficult, when on his deathbed, to pardon his enemies.
call themselves Christians, is too horrible for belief. Oh, it is And, whatever people may say," continued Caderousse, in
his native language, which was not altogether devoid of
impossible -- utterly impossible!"
rude poetry, "I cannot help being more frightened at the idea
"What I have said, I have said," answered Caderousse.
of the malediction of the dead than the hatred of the living."
"And you are a fool for having said anything about it," said a
"Imbecile!" exclaimed La Carconte.
voice from the top of the stairs. "Why should you meddle
"Do you, then, know in what manner Fernand injured
with what does not concern you?"
Dantes?" inquired the abbe of Caderousse.
The two men turned quickly, and saw the sickly
countenance of La Carconte peering between the baluster "Do I? No one better."
rails; attracted by the sound of voices, she had feebly "Speak out then, say what it was!"
dragged herself down the stairs, and, seated on the lower
step, head on knees, she had listened to the foregoing "Gaspard!" cried La Carconte, "do as you will; you are
conversation. "Mind your own business, wife," replied master -- but if you take my advice you'll hold your tongue."
Caderousse sharply. "This gentleman asks me for
information, which common politeness will not permit me to
refuse."
"Politeness, you simpleton!" retorted La Carconte. "What
have you to do with politeness, I should like to know? Better
study a little common prudence. How do you know the
motives that person may have for trying to extract all he can
from you?"

"Well, wife," replied Caderousse, "I don't know but what
you're right!"
"So you will say nothing?" asked the abbe.
"Why, what good would it do?" asked Caderousse. "If the
poor lad were living, and came to me and begged that I
would candidly tell which were his true and which his false
friends, why, perhaps, I should not hesitate. But you tell me
he is no more, and therefore can have nothing to do with
hatred or revenge, so let all such feeling be buried with him."

"I pledge you my word, madam," said the abbe, "that my
intentions are good; and that your husband can incur no risk,
"You prefer, then," said the abbe, "that I should bestow on
provided he answers me candidly."
men you say are false and treacherous, the reward intended
"Ah, that's all very fine," retorted the woman. "Nothing is for faithful friendship?"
easier than to begin with fair promises and assurances of
"That is true enough," returned Caderousse. "You say truly,
nothing to fear; but when poor, silly folks, like my husband
the gift of poor Edmond was not meant for such traitors as
there, have been persuaded to tell all they know, the
Fernand and Danglars; besides, what would it be to them?
promises and assurances of safety are quickly forgotten; and
no more than a drop of water in the ocean."
at some moment when nobody is expecting it, behold
trouble and misery, and all sorts of persecutions, are heaped "Remember," chimed in La Carconte, "those two could crush
on the unfortunate wretches, who cannot even see whence you at a single blow!"
all their afflictions come."
"How so?" inquired the abbe. "Are these persons, then, so
"Nay, nay, my good woman, make yourself perfectly easy, I rich and powerful?"
beg of you. Whatever evils may befall you, they will not be
93


CHAPTER 26


THE PONT DU GARD INN

"Do you not know their history?"
"I do not. Pray relate it to me!" Caderousse seemed to reflect
for a few moments, then said, "No, truly, it would take up
too much time."
"Well, my good friend," returned the abbe, in a tone that
indicated utter indifference on his part, "you are at liberty,
either to speak or be silent, just as you please; for my own
part, I respect your scruples and admire your sentiments; so
let the matter end. I shall do my duty as conscientiously as I
can, and fulfil my promise to the dying man. My first
business will be to dispose of this diamond." So saying, the
abbe again drew the small box from his pocket, opened it,
and contrived to hold it in such a light, that a bright flash of
brilliant hues passed before the dazzled gaze of Caderousse.

"There, you see, wife," said the former, "this splendid
diamond might all be ours, if we chose!"
"Do you believe it?"
"Why, surely a man of his holy profession would not deceive
us!"
"Well," replied La Carconte, "do as you like. For my part, I
wash my hands of the affair." So saying, she once more
climbed the staircase leading to her chamber, her body
convulsed with chills, and her teeth rattling in her head, in
spite of the intense heat of the weather. Arrived at the top
stair, she turned round, and called out, in a warning tone, to
her husband, "Gaspard, consider well what you are about to
do!"

"I have both reflected and decided," answered he. La
Carconte then entered her chamber, the flooring of which
"Diamond!" exclaimed La Carconte, rising and descending to creaked beneath her heavy, uncertain tread, as she
the chamber with a tolerably firm step; "what diamond are proceeded towards her arm-chair, into which she fell as
you talking about?"
though exhausted.
"Wife, wife!" cried he in a hoarse voice, "come here!"

"Why, did you not hear all we said?" inquired Caderousse.
"It is a beautiful diamond left by poor Edmond Dantes, to be
sold, and the money divided between his father, Mercedes,
his betrothed bride, Fernand, Danglars, and myself. The
jewel is worth at least fifty thousand francs."
"Oh, what a magnificent jewel!" cried the astonished woman.
"The fifth part of the profits from this stone belongs to us
then, does it not?" asked Caderousse.
"It does," replied the abbe; "with the addition of an equal
division of that part intended for the elder Dantes, which I
believe myself at liberty to divide equally with the four
survivors."

"Well," asked the abbe, as he returned to the apartment
below, "what have you made up your mind to do?"
"To tell you all I know," was the reply.
"I certainly think you act wisely in so doing," said the priest.
"Not because I have the least desire to learn anything you
may please to conceal from me, but simply that if, through
your assistance, I could distribute the legacy according to the
wishes of the testator, why, so much the better, that is all."
"I hope it may be so," replied Caderousse, his face flushed
with cupidity.
"I am all attention," said the abbe.

"Stop a minute," answered Caderousse; "we might be
interrupted in the most interesting part of my story, which
"As being the friends Edmond esteemed most faithful and would be a pity; and it is as well that your visit hither should
devoted to him."
be made known only to ourselves." With these words he
went stealthily to the door, which he closed, and, by way of
"I don't call those friends who betray and ruin you,"
still greater precaution, bolted and barred it, as he was
murmured the wife in her turn, in a low, muttering voice.
accustomed to do at night. During this time the abbe had
"Of course not!" rejoined Caderousse quickly; "no more do I, chosen his place for listening at his ease. He removed his
and that was what I was observing to this gentleman just seat into a corner of the room, where he himself would be in
now. I said I looked upon it as a sacrilegious profanation to deep shadow, while the light would be fully thrown on the
reward treachery, perhaps crime."
narrator; then, with head bent down and hands clasped, or
"Remember," answered the abbe calmly, as he replaced the rather clinched together, he prepared to give his whole
jewel and its case in the pocket of his cassock, "it is your fault, attention to Caderousse, who seated himself on the little
not mine, that I do so. You will have the goodness to furnish stool, exactly opposite to him.
me with the address of both Fernand and Danglars, in order "Remember, this is no affair of mine," said the trembling
that I may execute Edmond's last wishes." The agitation of voice of La Carconte, as though through the flooring of her
Caderousse became extreme, and large drops of perspiration chamber she viewed the scene that was enacting below.
rolled from his heated brow. As he saw the abbe rise from
"Enough, enough!" replied Caderousse; "say no more about
his seat and go towards the door, as though to ascertain if his
it; I will take all the consequences upon myself." And he
horse were sufficiently refreshed to continue his journey,
began his story.
Caderousse and his wife exchanged looks of deep meaning.
"And why among us four?" inquired Caderousse.

94


Chapter 27

The Story

"F

irst, sir," said Caderousse, "you must make me a boy loves me better than anything in the world; and if he
promise."
gets out of prison he will come and see me the first thing,
and what would he think if I did not wait here for him?' I
"What is that?" inquired the abbe.
heard all this from the window, for I was anxious that
"Why, if you ever make use of the details I am about to give Mercedes should persuade the old man to accompany her,
you, that you will never let any one know that it was I who for his footsteps over my head night and day did not leave
supplied them; for the persons of whom I am about to talk me a moment's repose."
are rich and powerful, and if they only laid the tips of their
"But did you not go up-stairs and try to console the poor old
fingers on me, I should break to pieces like glass."
man?" asked the abbe.
"Make yourself easy, my friend," replied the abbe. "I am a
"Ah, sir," replied Caderousse, "we cannot console those who
priest, and confessions die in my breast. Recollect, our only
will not be consoled, and he was one of these; besides, I
desire is to carry out, in a fitting manner, the last wishes of
know not why, but he seemed to dislike seeing me. One
our friend. Speak, then, without reserve, as without hatred;
night, however, I heard his sobs, and I could not resist my
tell the truth, the whole truth; I do not know, never may
desire to go up to him, but when I reached his door he was
know, the persons of whom you are about to speak; besides,
no longer weeping but praying. I cannot now repeat to you,
I am an Italian, and not a Frenchman, and belong to God,
sir, all the eloquent words and imploring language he made
and not to man, and I shall shortly retire to my convent,
use of; it was more than piety, it was more than grief, and I,
which I have only quitted to fulfil the last wishes of a dying
who am no canter, and hate the Jesuits, said then to myself,
man." This positive assurance seemed to give Caderousse a
`It is really well, and I am very glad that I have not any
little courage.
children; for if I were a father and felt such excessive grief as
"Well, then, under these circumstances," said Caderousse, "I the old man does, and did not find in my memory or heart
will, I even believe I ought to undeceive you as to the all he is now saying, I should throw myself into the sea at
friendship which poor Edmond thought so sincere and once, for I could not bear it.'"
unquestionable."
"Poor father!" murmured the priest.
"Begin with his father, if you please." said the abbe;
"From day to day he lived on alone, and more and more
"Edmond talked to me a great deal about the old man for
solitary. M. Morrel and Mercedes came to see him, but his
whom he had the deepest love."
door was closed; and, although I was certain he was at home,
"The history is a sad one, sir," said Caderousse, shaking his he would not make any answer. One day, when, contrary to
head; "perhaps you know all the earlier part of it?"
his custom, he had admitted Mercedes, and the poor girl, in
"Yes." answered the abbe; "Edmond related to me everything spite of her own grief and despair, endeavored to console
until the moment when he was arrested in a small cabaret him, he said to her, -- `Be assured, my dear daughter, he is
dead; and instead of expecting him, it is he who is awaiting
close to Marseilles."
us; I am quite happy, for I am the oldest, and of course shall
"At La Reserve! Oh, yes; I can see it all before me this see him first.' However well disposed a person may be, why
moment."
you see we leave off after a time seeing persons who are in
sorrow, they make one melancholy; and so at last old Dantes
"Was it not his betrothal feast?"
was left all to himself, and I only saw from time to time
"It was and the feast that began so gayly had a very
strangers go up to him and come down again with some
sorrowful ending; a police commissary, followed by four
bundle they tried to hide; but I guessed what these bundles
soldiers, entered, and Dantes was arrested."
were, and that he sold by degrees what he had to pay for his
"Yes, and up to this point I know all," said the priest. "Dantes subsistence. At length the poor old fellow reached the end of
himself only knew that which personally concerned him, for all he had; he owed three quarters' rent, and they threatened
he never beheld again the five persons I have named to you, to turn him out; he begged for another week, which was
or heard mention of any one of them."
granted to him. I know this, because the landlord came into
"Well, when Dantes was arrested, Monsieur Morrel hastened my apartment when he left his. For the first three days I
to obtain the particulars, and they were very sad. The old heard him walking about as usual, but, on the fourth I heard
man returned alone to his home, folded up his wedding suit nothing. I then resolved to go up to him at all risks. The door
with tears in his eyes, and paced up and down his chamber was closed, but I looked through the keyhole, and saw him
the whole day, and would not go to bed at all, for I was so pale and haggard, that believing him very ill, I went and
underneath him and heard him walking the whole night; told M. Morrel and then ran on to Mercedes. They both came
and for myself, I assure you I could not sleep either, for the immediately, M. Morrel bringing a doctor, and the doctor
grief of the poor father gave me great uneasiness, and every said it was inflammation of the bowels, and ordered him a
step he took went to my heart as really as if his foot had limited diet. I was there, too, and I never shall forget the old
pressed against my breast. The next day Mercedes came to man's smile at this prescription. From that time he received
implore the protection of M. de Villefort; she did not obtain all who came; he had an excuse for not eating any more; the
it, however, and went to visit the old man; when she saw doctor had put him on a diet." The abbe uttered a kind of
him so miserable and heart-broken, having passed a groan. "The story interests you, does it not, sir?" inquired
sleepless night, and not touched food since the previous day, Caderousse.
she wished him to go with her that she might take care of "Yes," replied the abbe, "it is very affecting."
him; but the old man would not consent. `No,' was the old
"Mercedes came again, and she found him so altered that she
man's reply, `I will not leave this house, for my poor dear
95


CHAPTER 27

was even more anxious than before to have him taken to her
own home. This was M. Morrel's wish also, who would fain
have conveyed the old man against his consent; but the old
man resisted, and cried so that they were actually frightened.
Mercedes remained, therefore, by his bedside, and M. Morrel
went away, making a sign to the Catalan that he had left his
purse on the chimney-piece. But availing himself of the
doctor's order, the old man would not take any sustenance;
at length (after nine days of despair and fasting), the old man
died, cursing those who had caused his misery, and saying
to Mercedes, `If you ever see my Edmond again, tell him I
die blessing him.'" The abbe rose from his chair, made two
turns round the chamber, and pressed his trembling hand
against his parched throat. "And you believe he died" --

THE STORY
were present when Dantes was arrested."
"Yes, sir, I was there, and very anxious to speak; but
Danglars restrained me. `If he should really be guilty,' said
he, `and did really put in to the Island of Elba; if he is really
charged with a letter for the Bonapartist committee at Paris,
and if they find this letter upon him, those who have
supported him will pass for his accomplices.' I confess I had
my fears, in the state in which politics then were, and I held
my tongue. It was cowardly, I confess, but it was not
criminal."
"I understand -- you allowed matters to take their course,
that was all."

"Yes, sir," answered Caderousse; "and remorse preys on me
night and day. I often ask pardon of God, I swear to you,
because this action, the only one with which I have seriously
to reproach myself in all my life, is no doubt the cause of my
The abbe, with a shaking hand, seized a glass of water that
abject condition. I am expiating a moment of selfishness, and
was standing by him half-full, swallowed it at one gulp, and
so I always say to La Carconte, when she complains, `Hold
then resumed his seat, with red eyes and pale cheeks. "This
your tongue, woman; it is the will of God.'" And Caderousse
was, indeed, a horrid event." said he in a hoarse voice.
bowed his head with every sign of real repentance.
"The more so, sir, as it was men's and not God's doing."
"Well, sir," said the abbe, "you have spoken unreservedly;
"Tell me of those men," said the abbe, "and remember too," and thus to accuse yourself is to deserve pardon."
he added in an almost menacing tone, "you have promised
"Unfortunately, Edmond is dead, and has not pardoned me."
to tell me everything. Tell me, therefore, who are these men
who killed the son with despair, and the father with "He did not know," said the abbe.
famine?"
"But he knows it all now," interrupted Caderousse; "they say
"Of hunger, sir, of hunger," said Caderousse. "I am as certain
of it as that we two are Christians."

"Two men jealous of him, sir; one from love, and the other
from ambition, -- Fernand and Danglars."
"How was this jealousy manifested? Speak on."
"They denounced Edmond as a Bonapartist agent."
"Which of the two denounced him? Which was the real
delinquent?"

the dead know everything." There was a brief silence; the
abbe rose and paced up and down pensively, and then
resumed his seat. "You have two or three times mentioned a
M. Morrel," he said; "who was he?"
"The owner of the Pharaon and patron of Dantes."
"And what part did he play in this sad drama?" inquired the
abbe.

"Both, sir; one with a letter, and the other put it in the post."

"The part of an honest man, full of courage and real regard.
Twenty times he interceded for Edmond. When the emperor
returned, he wrote, implored, threatened, and so
"At La Reserve, the day before the betrothal feast."
energetically, that on the second restoration he was
"'Twas so, then -- 'twas so, then," murmured the abbe. "Oh, persecuted as a Bonapartist. Ten times, as I told you, he came
Faria, Faria, how well did you judge men and things!"
to see Dantes' father, and offered to receive him in his own
house; and the night or two before his death, as I have
"What did you please to say, sir?" asked Caderousse.
already said, he left his purse on the mantelpiece, with
"Nothing, nothing," replied the priest; "go on."
which they paid the old man's debts, and buried him
"It was Danglars who wrote the denunciation with his left decently; and so Edmond's father died, as he had lived,
hand, that his writing might not be recognized, and Fernand without doing harm to any one. I have the purse still by me
-- a large one, made of red silk."
who put it in the post."
"And where was this letter written?"

"But," exclaimed the abbe suddenly, "you were there
yourself."

"And," asked the abbe, "is M. Morrel still alive?"
"Yes," replied Caderousse.

"I!" said Caderousse, astonished; "who told you I was there?"

"In that case," replied the abbe, "he should be rich, happy."
The abbe saw he had overshot the mark, and he added Caderousse smiled bitterly. "Yes, happy as myself," said he.
quickly, -- "No one; but in order to have known everything
"What! M. Morrel unhappy?" exclaimed the abbe.
so well, you must have been an eye-witness."
"True, true!" said Caderousse in a choking voice, "I was "He is reduced almost to the last extremity -- nay, he is
almost at the point of dishonor."
there."
"And did you not remonstrate against such infamy?" asked
the abbe; "if not, you were an accomplice."
"Sir," replied Caderousse, "they had made me drink to such
an excess that I nearly lost all perception. I had only an
indistinct understanding of what was passing around me. I
said all that a man in such a state could say; but they both
assured me that it was a jest they were carrying on, and
perfectly harmless."
"Next day -- next day, sir, you must have seen plain enough
what they had been doing, yet you said nothing, though you
96

"How?"
"Yes," continued Caderousse, "so it is; after five and twenty
years of labor, after having acquired a most honorable name
in the trade of Marseilles, M. Morrel is utterly ruined; he has
lost five ships in two years, has suffered by the bankruptcy
of three large houses, and his only hope now is in that very
Pharaon which poor Dantes commanded, and which is
expected from the Indies with a cargo of cochineal and
indigo. If this ship founders, like the others, he is a ruined
man."

"And has the unfortunate man wife or children?" inquired
the abbe.
"Yes, he has a wife, who through everything has behaved
like an angel; he has a daughter, who was about to marry the
man she loved, but whose family now will not allow him to
wed the daughter of a ruined man; he has, besides, a son, a
lieutenant in the army; and, as you may suppose, all this,
instead of lessening, only augments his sorrows. If he were
alone in the world he would blow out his brains, and there
would be an end."
"Horrible!" ejaculated the priest.
"And it is thus heaven recompenses virtue, sir," added
Caderousse. "You see, I, who never did a bad action but that
I have told you of -- am in destitution, with my poor wife
dying of fever before my very eyes, and I unable to do
anything in the world for her; I shall die of hunger, as old
Dantes did, while Fernand and Danglars are rolling in
wealth."
"How is that?"
"Because their deeds have brought them good fortune, while
honest men have been reduced to misery."

a general who carried on a secret correspondence with the
enemy. That same night the general was to go over to the
English. He proposed to Fernand to accompany him;
Fernand agreed to do so, deserted his post, and followed the
general. Fernand would have been court-martialed if
Napoleon had remained on the throne, but his action was
rewarded by the Bourbons. He returned to France with the
epaulet of sub-lieutenant, and as the protection of the
general, who is in the highest favor, was accorded to him, he
was a captain in 1823, during the Spanish war -- that is to say,
at the time when Danglars made his early speculations.
Fernand was a Spaniard, and being sent to Spain to ascertain
the feeling of his fellow-countrymen, found Danglars there,
got on very intimate terms with him, won over the support
of the royalists at the capital and in the provinces, received
promises and made pledges on his own part, guided his
regiment by paths known to himself alone through the
mountain gorges which were held by the royalists, and, in
fact, rendered such services in this brief campaign that, after
the taking of Trocadero, he was made colonel, and received
the title of count and the cross of an officer of the Legion of
Honor."
"Destiny! destiny!" murmured the abbe.

"What has become of Danglars, the instigator, and therefore
the most guilty?"

"Yes, but listen: this was not all. The war with Spain being
ended, Fernand's career was checked by the long peace
"What has become of him? Why, he left Marseilles, and was which seemed likely to endure throughout Europe. Greece
taken, on the recommendation of M. Morrel, who did not only had risen against Turkey, and had begun her war of
know his crime, as cashier into a Spanish bank. During the independence; all eyes were turned towards Athens -- it was
war with Spain he was employed in the commissariat of the the fashion to pity and support the Greeks. The French
French army, and made a fortune; then with that money he government, without protecting them openly, as you know,
speculated in the funds, and trebled or quadrupled his gave countenance to volunteer assistance. Fernand sought
capital; and, having first married his banker's daughter, who and obtained leave to go and serve in Greece, still having his
left him a widower, he has married a second time, a widow, name kept on the army roll. Some time after, it was stated
a Madame de Nargonne, daughter of M. de Servieux, the that the Comte de Morcerf (this was the name he bore) had
king's chamberlain, who is in high favor at court. He is a entered the service of Ali Pasha with the rank of
millionaire, and they have made him a baron, and now he is instructor-general. Ali Pasha was killed, as you know, but
the Baron Danglars, with a fine residence in the Rue de before he died he recompensed the services of Fernand by
Mont-Blanc, with ten horses in his stables, six footmen in his leaving him a considerable sum, with which he returned to
ante-chamber, and I know not how many millions in his France, when he was gazetted lieutenant-general."
strongbox."
"So that now?" -- inquired the abbe.
"Ah!" said the abbe, in a peculiar tone, "he is happy."
"Happy? Who can answer for that? Happiness or
unhappiness is the secret known but to one's self and the
walls -- walls have ears but no tongue; but if a large fortune
produces happiness, Danglars is happy."
"And Fernand?"
"Fernand? Why, much the same story."
"But how could a poor Catalan fisher-boy, without education
or resources, make a fortune? I confess this staggers me."

"So that now," continued Caderousse, "he owns a
magnificent house -- No. 27, Rue du Helder, Paris." The abbe
opened his mouth, hesitated for a moment, then, making an
effort at self-control, he said, "And Mercedes -- they tell me
that she has disappeared?"
"Disappeared," said Caderousse, "yes, as the sun disappears,
to rise the next day with still more splendor."
"Has she made a fortune also?" inquired the abbe, with an
ironical smile.

"Mercedes is at this moment one of the greatest ladies in
"And it has staggered everybody. There must have been in
Paris," replied Caderousse.
his life some strange secret that no one knows."
"Go on," said the abbe; "it seems as if I were listening to the
"But, then, by what visible steps has he attained this high
story of a dream. But I have seen things so extraordinary,
fortune or high position?"
that what you tell me seems less astonishing than it
"Both, sir -- he has both fortune and position -- both."
otherwise might."
"This must be impossible!"

"Mercedes was at first in the deepest despair at the blow
"It would seem so; but listen, and you will understand. Some which deprived her of Edmond. I have told you of her
days before the return of the emperor, Fernand was drafted. attempts to propitiate M. de Villefort, her devotion to the
The Bourbons left him quietly enough at the Catalans, but elder Dantes. In the midst of her despair, a new affliction
Napoleon returned, a special levy was made, and Fernand overtook her. This was the departure of Fernand -- of
was compelled to join. I went too; but as I was older than Fernand, whose crime she did not know, and whom she
Fernand, and had just married my poor wife, I was only sent regarded as her brother. Fernand went, and Mercedes
to the coast. Fernand was enrolled in the active troop, went remained alone. Three months passed and still she wept -to the frontier with his regiment, and was at the battle of no news of Edmond, no news of Fernand, no companionship
Ligny. The night after that battle he was sentry at the door of save that of an old man who was dying with despair. One
evening, after a day of accustomed vigil at the angle of two
97


CHAPTER 27


THE STORY

roads leading to Marseilles from the Catalans, she returned
to her home more depressed than ever. Suddenly she heard
a step she knew, turned anxiously around, the door opened,
and Fernand, dressed in the uniform of a sub-lieutenant,
stood before her. It was not the one she wished for most, but
it seemed as if a part of her past life had returned to her.
Mercedes seized Fernand's hands with a transport which he
took for love, but which was only joy at being no longer
alone in the world, and seeing at last a friend, after long
hours of solitary sorrow. And then, it must be confessed,
Fernand had never been hated -- he was only not precisely
loved. Another possessed all Mercedes' heart; that other was
absent, had disappeared, perhaps was dead. At this last
thought Mercedes burst into a flood of tears, and wrung her
hands in agony; but the thought, which she had always
repelled before when it was suggested to her by another,
came now in full force upon her mind; and then, too, old
Dantes incessantly said to her, `Our Edmond is dead; if he
were not, he would return to us.' The old man died, as I have
told you; had he lived, Mercedes, perchance, had not become
the wife of another, for he would have been there to
reproach her infidelity. Fernand saw this, and when he
learned of the old man's death he returned. He was now a
lieutenant. At his first coming he had not said a word of love
to Mercedes; at the second he reminded her that he loved her.
Mercedes begged for six months more in which to await and
mourn for Edmond."

honors have comforted her; she is rich, a countess, and yet" -Caderousse paused.

"Well, Mercedes was married," proceeded Caderousse; "but
although in the eyes of the world she appeared calm, she
nearly fainted as she passed La Reserve, where, eighteen
months before, the betrothal had been celebrated with him
whom she might have known she still loved had she looked
to the bottom of her heart. Fernand, more happy, but not
more at his ease -- for I saw at this time he was in constant
dread of Edmond's return -- Fernand was very anxious to get
his wife away, and to depart himself. There were too many
unpleasant possibilities associated with the Catalans, and
eight days after the wedding they left Marseilles."

"What, for me only?" cried Caderousse, "ah, sir, do not jest
with me!"

"And yet what?" asked the abbe.
"Yet, I am sure, she is not happy," said Caderousse.
"What makes you believe this?"
"Why, when I found myself utterly destitute, I thought my
old friends would, perhaps, assist me. So I went to Danglars,
who would not even receive me. I called on Fernand, who
sent me a hundred francs by his valet-de-chambre."
"Then you did not see either of them?"
"No, but Madame de Morcerf saw me."
"How was that?"
"As I went away a purse fell at my feet -- it contained five
and twenty louis; I raised my head quickly, and saw
Mercedes, who at once shut the blind."
"And M. de Villefort?" asked the abbe.
"Oh, he never was a friend of mine, I did not know him, and
I had nothing to ask of him."
"Do you not know what became of him, and the share he had
in Edmond's misfortunes?"

"No; I only know that some time after Edmond's arrest, he
married Mademoiselle de Saint-Meran, and soon after left
Marseilles; no doubt he has been as lucky as the rest; no
"So that," said the abbe, with a bitter smile, "that makes
doubt he is as rich as Danglars, as high in station as Fernand.
eighteen months in all. What more could the most devoted
I only, as you see, have remained poor, wretched, and
lover desire?" Then he murmured the words of the English
forgotten."
poet, "`Frailty, thy name is woman.'"
"You are mistaken, my friend," replied the abbe; "God may
"Six months afterwards," continued Caderousse, "the
seem sometimes to forget for a time, while his justice reposes,
marriage took place in the church of Accoules."
but there always comes a moment when he remembers -"The very church in which she was to have married and behold -- a proof!" As he spoke, the abbe took the
Edmond," murmured the priest; "there was only a change of diamond from his pocket, and giving it to Caderousse, said,
bride-grooms."
-- "Here, my friend, take this diamond, it is yours."

"Did you ever see Mercedes again?" inquired the priest.
"Yes, during the Spanish war, at Perpignan, where Fernand
had left her; she was attending to the education of her son."
The abbe started. "Her son?" said he.

"This diamond was to have been shared among his friends.
Edmond had one friend only, and thus it cannot be divided.
Take the diamond, then, and sell it; it is worth fifty thousand
francs, and I repeat my wish that this sum may suffice to
release you from your wretchedness."
"Oh, sir," said Caderousse, putting out one hand timidly, and
with the other wiping away the perspiration which bedewed
his brow, -- "Oh, sir, do not make a jest of the happiness or
despair of a man."
"I know what happiness and what despair are, and I never
make a jest of such feelings. Take it, then, but in exchange -- "

Caderousse, who touched the diamond, withdrew his hand.
The abbe smiled. "In exchange," he continued, "give me the
"Yes," replied Caderousse, "little Albert."
red silk purse that M. Morrel left on old Dantes'
"But, then, to be able to instruct her child," continued the chimney-piece, and which you tell me is still in your hands."
abbe, "she must have received an education herself. I Caderousse, more and more astonished, went toward a large
understood from Edmond that she was the daughter of a oaken cupboard, opened it, and gave the abbe a long purse
simple fisherman, beautiful but uneducated."
of faded red silk, round which were two copper runners that
"Oh," replied Caderousse, "did he know so little of his lovely had once been gilt. The abbe took it, and in return gave
betrothed? Mercedes might have been a queen, sir, if the Caderousse the diamond.
crown were to be placed on the heads of the loveliest and "Oh, you are a man of God, sir," cried Caderousse; "for no
most intelligent. Fernand's fortune was already waxing great, one knew that Edmond had given you this diamond, and
and she developed with his growing fortune. She learned you might have kept it."
drawing, music -- everything. Besides, I believe, between
"Which," said the abbe to himself, "you would have done."
ourselves, she did this in order to distract her mind, that she
The abbe rose, took his hat and gloves. "Well," he said, "all
might forget; and she only filled her head in order to
you have told me is perfectly true, then, and I may believe it
alleviate the weight on her heart. But now her position in life
in every particular."
is assured," continued Caderousse; "no doubt fortune and
98

"See, sir," replied Caderousse, "in this corner is a crucifix in
holy wood -- here on this shelf is my wife's testament; open
this book, and I will swear upon it with my hand on the
crucifix. I will swear to you by my soul's salvation, my faith
as a Christian, I have told everything to you as it occurred,
and as the recording angel will tell it to the ear of God at the
day of the last judgment!"
"'Tis well," said the abbe, convinced by his manner and tone
that Caderousse spoke the truth. "'Tis well, and may this
money profit you! Adieu; I go far from men who thus so
bitterly injure each other." The abbe with difficulty got away
from the enthusiastic thanks of Caderousse, opened the door
himself, got out and mounted his horse, once more saluted
the innkeeper, who kept uttering his loud farewells, and
then returned by the road he had travelled in coming. When
Caderousse turned around, he saw behind him La Carconte,
paler and trembling more than ever. "Is, then, all that I have
heard really true?" she inquired.

Caderousse, half bewildered with joy; "yes, nothing more
true! See, here it is." The woman gazed at it a moment, and
then said, in a gloomy voice, "Suppose it's false?" Caderousse
started and turned pale. "False!" he muttered. "False! Why
should that man give me a false diamond?"
"To get your secret without paying for it, you blockhead!"
Caderousse remained for a moment aghast under the weight
of such an idea. "Oh!" he said, taking up his hat, which he
placed on the red handkerchief tied round his head, "we will
soon find out."
"In what way?"

"Why, the fair is on at Beaucaire, there are always jewellers
from Paris there, and I will show it to them. Look after the
house, wife, and I shall be back in two hours," and
Caderousse left the house in haste, and ran rapidly in the
direction opposite to that which the priest had taken. "Fifty
thousand francs!" muttered La Carconte when left alone; "it
"What? That he has given the diamond to us only?" inquired is a large sum of money, but it is not a fortune."F

99


CHAPTER 28


Chapter 28

THE PRISON REGISTER

The Prison Register

T

he day after that in which the scene we have just
described had taken place on the road between
Bellegarde and Beaucaire, a man of about thirty or two and
thirty, dressed in a bright blue frock coat, nankeen trousers,
and a white waistcoat, having the appearance and accent of
an Englishman, presented himself before the mayor of
Marseilles. "Sir," said he, "I am chief clerk of the house of
Thomson & French, of Rome. We are, and have been these
ten years, connected with the house of Morrel & Son, of
Marseilles. We have a hundred thousand francs or
thereabouts loaned on their securities, and we are a little
uneasy at reports that have reached us that the firm is on the
brink of ruin. I have come, therefore, express from Rome, to
ask you for information."
"Sir," replied the mayor. "I know very well that during the
last four or five years misfortune has seemed to pursue M.
Morrel. He has lost four or five vessels, and suffered by three
or four bankruptcies; but it is not for me, although I am a
creditor myself to the amount of ten thousand francs, to give
any information as to the state of his finances. Ask of me, as
mayor, what is my opinion of M. Morrel, and I shall say that
he is a man honorable to the last degree, and who has up to
this time fulfilled every engagement with scrupulous
punctuality. This is all I can say, sir; if you wish to learn
more, address yourself to M. de Boville, the inspector of
prisons, No. 15, Rue de Nouailles; he has, I believe, two
hundred thousand francs in Morrel's hands, and if there be
any grounds for apprehension, as this is a greater amount
than mine, you will most probably find him better informed
than myself."
The Englishman seemed to appreciate this extreme delicacy,
made his bow and went away, proceeding with a
characteristic British stride towards the street mentioned. M.
de Boville was in his private room, and the Englishman, on
perceiving him, made a gesture of surprise, which seemed to
indicate that it was not the first time he had been in his
presence. As to M. de Boville, he was in such a state of
despair, that it was evident all the faculties of his mind,
absorbed in the thought which occupied him at the moment,
did not allow either his memory or his imagination to stray
to the past. The Englishman, with the coolness of his nation,
addressed him in terms nearly similar to those with which
he had accosted the mayor of Marseilles. "Oh, sir," exclaimed
M. de Boville, "your fears are unfortunately but too well
founded, and you see before you a man in despair. I had two
hundred thousand francs placed in the hands of Morrel &
Son; these two hundred thousand francs were the dowry of
my daughter, who was to be married in a fortnight, and
these two hundred thousand francs were payable, half on
the 15th of this month, and the other half on the 15th of next
month. I had informed M. Morrel of my desire to have these
payments punctually, and he has been here within the last
half-hour to tell me that if his ship, the Pharaon, did not
come into port on the 15th, he would be wholly unable to
make this payment."
"But," said the Englishman, "this looks very much like a
suspension of payment."
"It looks more like bankruptcy!" exclaimed M. de Boville
despairingly.

you with considerable apprehension?"
"To tell you the truth, I consider it lost."
"Well, then, I will buy it of you!"
"You?"
"Yes, I!"
"But at a tremendous discount, of course?"
"No, for two hundred thousand francs. Our house," added
the Englishman with a laugh, "does not do things in that
way."
"And you will pay" -"Ready money." And the Englishman drew from his pocket a
bundle of bank-notes, which might have been twice the sum
M. de Boville feared to lose. A ray of joy passed across M. de
Boville's countenance, yet he made an effort at self-control,
and said, -- "Sir, I ought to tell you that, in all probability,
you will not realize six per cent of this sum."
"That's no affair of mine," replied the Englishman, "that is the
affair of the house of Thomson & French, in whose name I
act. They have, perhaps, some motive to serve in hastening
the ruin of a rival firm. But all I know, sir, is, that I am ready
to hand you over this sum in exchange for your assignment
of the debt. I only ask a brokerage."
"Of course, that is perfectly just," cried M. de Boville. "The
commission is usually one and a half; will you have two -three -- five per cent, or even more? Whatever you say."
"Sir," replied the Englishman, laughing, "I am like my house,
and do not do such things -- no, the commission I ask is
quite different."
"Name it, sir, I beg."
"You are the inspector of prisons?"
"I have been so these fourteen years."
"You keep the registers of entries and departures?"
"I do."
"To these registers there are added notes relative to the
prisoners?"
"There are special reports on every prisoner."
"Well, sir, I was educated at home by a poor devil of an abbe,
who disappeared suddenly. I have since learned that he was
confined in the Chateau d'If, and I should like to learn some
particulars of his death."
"What was his name?"
"The Abbe Faria."
"Oh, I recollect him perfectly," cried M. de Boville; "he was
crazy."
"So they said."
"Oh, he was, decidedly."
"Very possibly; but what sort of madness was it?"
"He pretended to know of an immense treasure, and offered
vast sums to the government if they would liberate him."

"Poor devil! -- and he is dead?"
The Englishman appeared to reflect a moment, and then said,
"Yes, sir, five or six months ago -- last February."
-- "From which it would appear, sir, that this credit inspires
100

"You have a good memory, sir, to recollect dates so well."
"I recollect this, because the poor devil's death was
accompanied by a singular incident."

the certainty of recovering his two hundred thousand francs,
-- "no matter, I can fancy it." And he shouted with laughter.
"So can I," said the Englishman, and he laughed too; but he
laughed as the English do, "at the end of his teeth."

"May I ask what that was?" said the Englishman with an
expression of curiosity, which a close observer would have "And so," continued the Englishman who first gained his
been astonished at discovering in his phlegmatic composure, "he was drowned?"
countenance.
"Unquestionably."
"Oh dear, yes, sir; the abbe's dungeon was forty or fifty feet
"So that the governor got rid of the dangerous and the crazy
distant from that of one of Bonaparte's emissaries, -- one of
prisoner at the same time?"
those who had contributed the most to the return of the
usurper in 1815, -- a very resolute and very dangerous man." "Precisely."
"Indeed!" said the Englishman.
"Yes," replied M. de Boville; "I myself had occasion to see
this man in 1816 or 1817, and we could only go into his
dungeon with a file of soldiers. That man made a deep
impression on me; I shall never forget his countenance!" The
Englishman smiled imperceptibly.
"And you say, sir," he interposed, "that the two dungeons" -"Were separated by a distance of fifty feet; but it appears that
this Edmond Dantes" -"This dangerous man's name was" -"Edmond Dantes. It appears, sir, that this Edmond Dantes
had procured tools, or made them, for they found a tunnel
through which the prisoners held communication with one
another."

"But some official document was drawn up as to this affair, I
suppose?" inquired the Englishman.
"Yes, yes, the mortuary deposition. You understand, Dantes'
relations, if he had any, might have some interest in
knowing if he were dead or alive."
"So that now, if there were anything to inherit from him,
they may do so with easy conscience. He is dead, and no
mistake about it."
"Oh, yes; and they may have the fact attested whenever they
please."
"So be it," said the Englishman. "But to return to these
registers."
"True, this story has diverted our attention from them.
Excuse me."

"This tunnel was dug, no doubt, with an intention of
escape?"

"Excuse you for what? For the story? By no means; it really
seems to me very curious."

"No doubt; but unfortunately for the prisoners, the Abbe
Faria had an attack of catalepsy, and died."

"Yes, indeed. So, sir, you wish to see all relating to the poor
abbe, who really was gentleness itself."

"That must have cut short the projects of escape."

"Yes, you will much oblige me."

"Go into my study here, and I will show it to you." And they
both entered M. de Boville's study. Everything was here
arranged in perfect order; each register had its number, each
file of papers its place. The inspector begged the Englishman
to seat himself in an arm-chair, and placed before him the
register and documents relative to the Chateau d'If, giving
him all the time he desired for the examination, while De
Boville seated himself in a corner, and began to read his
"It was a bold step, and one that showed some courage,"
newspaper. The Englishman easily found the entries relative
remarked the Englishman.
to the Abbe Faria; but it seemed that the history which the
"As I have already told you, sir, he was a very dangerous inspector had related interested him greatly, for after having
man; and, fortunately, by his own act disembarrassed the perused the first documents he turned over the leaves until
government of the fears it had on his account."
he reached the deposition respecting Edmond Dantes. There
he found everything arranged in due order, -- the accusation,
"How was that?"
examination, Morrel's petition, M. de Villefort's marginal
"How? Do you not comprehend?"
notes. He folded up the accusation quietly, and put it as
quietly in his pocket; read the examination, and saw that the
"No."
name of Noirtier was not mentioned in it; perused, too, the
"The Chateau d'If has no cemetery, and they simply throw application dated 10th April, 1815, in which Morrel, by the
the dead into the sea, after fastening a thirty-six pound deputy procureur's advice, exaggerated with the best
cannon-ball to their feet."
intentions (for Napoleon was then on the throne) the services
"Well," observed the Englishman as if he were slow of Dantes had rendered to the imperial cause -- services which
Villefort's certificates rendered indispensable. Then he saw
comprehension.
through the whole thing. This petition to Napoleon, kept
"Well, they fastened a thirty-six pound ball to his feet, and
back by Villefort, had become, under the second restoration,
threw him into the sea."
a terrible weapon against him in the hands of the king's
"Really!" exclaimed the Englishman.
attorney. He was no longer astonished when he searched on
"Yes, sir," continued the inspector of prisons. "You may to find in the register this note, placed in a bracket against
imagine the amazement of the fugitive when he found his name: -himself flung headlong over the rocks! I should like to have Edmond Dantes.
seen his face at that moment."
An inveterate Bonapartist; took an active part in the return
"That would have been difficult."
from the Island of Elba.
"For the dead man, yes," replied M. de Boville, "but not for
the survivor; on the contrary, this Dantes saw a means of
accelerating his escape. He, no doubt, thought that prisoners
who died in the Chateau d'If were interred in an ordinary
burial-ground, and he conveyed the dead man into his own
cell, took his place in the sack in which they had sewed up
the corpse, and awaited the moment of interment."

"No matter," replied De Boville, in supreme good-humor at

To be kept in strict solitary confinement, and to be closely
101


CHAPTER 28

watched and guarded.

THE PRISON REGISTER

his pocket the accusation written by Danglars under the
arbor of La Reserve, and which had the postmark,
Beneath these lines was written in another hand: "See note
"Marseilles, 27th Feb., delivery 6 o'clock, P.M." But it must be
above -- nothing can be done." He compared the writing in
said that if he had seen it, he attached so little importance to
the bracket with the writing of the certificate placed beneath
this scrap of paper, and so much importance to his two
Morrel's petition, and discovered that the note in the bracket
hundred thousand francs, that he would not have opposed
was the some writing as the certificate -- that is to say, was in
whatever the Englishman might do, however irregular it
Villefort's handwriting. As to the note which accompanied
might be.
this, the Englishman understood that it might have been
added by some inspector who had taken a momentary "Thanks," said the latter, closing the register with a slam, "I
interest in Dantes' situation, but who had, from the remarks have all I want; now it is for me to perform my promise.
we have quoted, found it impossible to give any effect to the Give me a simple assignment of your debt; acknowledge
interest he had felt.
therein the receipt of the cash, and I will hand you over the
money." He rose, gave his seat to M. de Boville, who took it
As we have said, the inspector, from discretion, and that he
without ceremony, and quickly drew up the required
might not disturb the Abbe Faria's pupil in his researches,
assignment, while the Englishman counted out the
had seated himself in a corner, and was reading Le Drapeau
bank-notes on the other side of the desk.
Blanc. He did not see the Englishman fold up and place in

102


Chapter 29

A

The House Of Morrel & Son

ny one who had quitted Marseilles a few years
previously, well acquainted with the interior of
Morrel's warehouse, and had returned at this date, would
have found a great change. Instead of that air of life, of
comfort, and of happiness that permeates a flourishing and
prosperous business establishment -- instead of merry faces
at the windows, busy clerks hurrying to and fro in the long
corridors -- instead of the court filled with bales of goods,
re-echoing with the cries and the jokes of porters, one would
have immediately perceived all aspect of sadness and gloom.
Out of all the numerous clerks that used to fill the deserted
corridor and the empty office, but two remained. One was a
young man of three or four and twenty, who was in love
with M. Morrel's daughter, and had remained with him in
spite of the efforts of his friends to induce him to withdraw;
the other was an old one-eyed cashier, called "Cocles," or
"Cock-eye," a nickname given him by the young men who
used to throng this vast now almost deserted bee-hive, and
which had so completely replaced his real name that he
would not, in all probability, have replied to any one who
addressed him by it.

to the reports afloat, was no longer to be had; and to meet
the one hundred thousand francs due on the 10th of the
present month, and the one hundred thousand francs due on
the 15th of the next month to M. de Boville, M. Morrel had,
in reality, no hope but the return of the Pharaon, of whose
departure he had learnt from a vessel which had weighed
anchor at the same time, and which had already arrived in
harbor. But this vessel which, like the Pharaon, came from
Calcutta, had been in for a fortnight, while no intelligence
had been received of the Pharaon.

Such was the state of affairs when, the day after his
interview with M. de Boville, the confidential clerk of the
house of Thomson & French of Rome, presented himself at
M. Morrel's. Emmanuel received him; this young man was
alarmed by the appearance of every new face, for every new
face might be that of a new creditor, come in anxiety to
question the head of the house. The young man, wishing to
spare his employer the pain of this interview, questioned the
new-comer; but the stranger declared that he had nothing to
say to M. Emmanuel, and that his business was with M.
Morrel in person. Emmanuel sighed, and summoned Cocles.
Cocles remained in M. Morrel's service, and a most singular Cocles appeared, and the young man bade him conduct the
change had taken place in his position; he had at the same stranger to M. Morrel's apartment. Cocles went first, and the
time risen to the rank of cashier, and sunk to the rank of a stranger followed him. On the staircase they met a beautiful
servant. He was, however, the same Cocles, good, patient, girl of sixteen or seventeen, who looked with anxiety at the
devoted, but inflexible on the subject of arithmetic, the only stranger.
point on which he would have stood firm against the world,
"M. Morrel is in his room, is he not, Mademoiselle Julie?"
even
against M.
Morrel;
and strong
in
the
said the cashier.
multiplication-table, which he had at his fingers' ends, no
matter what scheme or what trap was laid to catch him. In "Yes; I think so, at least," said the young girl hesitatingly. "Go
the midst of the disasters that befell the house, Cocles was and see, Cocles, and if my father is there, announce this
the only one unmoved. But this did not arise from a want of gentleman."
affection; on the contrary, from a firm conviction. Like the "It will be useless to announce me, mademoiselle," returned
rats that one by one forsake the doomed ship even before the the Englishman. "M. Morrel does not know my name; this
vessel weighs anchor, so all the numerous clerks had by worthy gentleman has only to announce the confidential
degrees deserted the office and the warehouse. Cocles had clerk of the house of Thomson & French of Rome, with
seen them go without thinking of inquiring the cause of their whom your father does business."
departure. Everything was as we have said, a question of
arithmetic to Cocles, and during twenty years he had always
seen all payments made with such exactitude, that it seemed The young girl turned pale and continued to descend, while
as impossible to him that the house should stop payment, as the stranger and Cocles continued to mount the staircase.
it would to a miller that the river that had so long turned his She entered the office where Emmanuel was, while Cocles,
mill should cease to flow.
by the aid of a key he possessed, opened a door in the corner
Nothing had as yet occurred to shake Cocles' belief; the last of a landing-place on the second staircase, conducted the
month's payment had been made with the most scrupulous stranger into an ante-chamber, opened a second door, which
exactitude; Cocles had detected an overbalance of fourteen he closed behind him, and after having left the clerk of the
sous in his cash, and the same evening he had brought them house of Thomson & French alone, returned and signed to
to M. Morrel, who, with a melancholy smile, threw them into him that he could enter. The Englishman entered, and found
Morrel seated at a table, turning over the formidable
an almost empty drawer, saying: -columns of his ledger, which contained the list of his
"Thanks, Cocles; you are the pearl of cashiers."
liabilities. At the sight of the stranger, M. Morrel closed the
Cocles went away perfectly happy, for this eulogium of M. ledger, arose, and offered a seat to the stranger; and when he
Morrel, himself the pearl of the honest men of Marseilles, had seen him seated, resumed his own chair. Fourteen years
flattered him more than a present of fifty crowns. But since had changed the worthy merchant, who, in his thirty-sixth
the end of the month M. Morrel had passed many an anxious year at the opening of this history, was now in his fiftieth; his
hour. In order to meet the payments then due; he had hair had turned white, time and sorrow had ploughed deep
collected all his resources, and, fearing lest the report of his furrows on his brow, and his look, once so firm and
distress should get bruited abroad at Marseilles when he was penetrating, was now irresolute and wandering, as if he
known to be reduced to such an extremity, he went to the feared being forced to fix his attention on some particular
Beaucaire fair to sell his wife's and daughter's jewels and a thought or person. The Englishman looked at him with an
portion of his plate. By this means the end of the month was air of curiosity, evidently mingled with interest. "Monsieur,"
passed, but his resources were now exhausted. Credit, owing said Morrel, whose uneasiness was increased by this
103


CHAPTER 29


THE HOUSE OF MORREL & SON

examination, "you wish to speak to me?"

shame. I fear I shall be forced to suspend payment."

"Yes, monsieur; you are aware from whom I come?"

"Have you no friends who could assist you?" Morrel smiled
mournfully. "In business, sir," said he, "one has no friends,
"The house of Thomson & French; at least, so my cashier tells
only correspondents."
me."
"It is true," murmured the Englishman; "then you have but
"He has told you rightly. The house of Thomson & French
one hope."
had 300,000 or 400,000 francs to pay this month in France;
and, knowing your strict punctuality, have collected all the "But one."
bills bearing your signature, and charged me as they became
"The last?"
due to present them, and to employ the money otherwise."
Morrel sighed deeply, and passed his hand over his forehead, "The last."
which was covered with perspiration.
"So that if this fail" -"So then, sir," said Morrel, "you hold bills of mine?"

"I am ruined, -- completely ruined!"

"Yes, and for a considerable sum."

"As I was on my way here, a vessel was coming into port."
"What is the amount?" asked Morrel with a voice he strove to "I know it, sir; a young man, who still adheres to my fallen
render firm.
fortunes, passes a part of his time in a belvidere at the top of
"Here is," said the Englishman, taking a quantity of papers the house, in hopes of being the first to announce good news
from his pocket, "an assignment of 200,000 francs to our to me; he has informed me of the arrival of this ship."
house by M. de Boville, the inspector of prisons, to whom "And it is not yours?"
they are due. You acknowledge, of course, that you owe this
"No, she is a Bordeaux vessel, La Gironde; she comes from
sum to him?"
India also; but she is not mine."
"Yes; he placed the money in my hands at four and a half per
"Perhaps she has spoken to the Pharaon, and brings you
cent nearly five years ago."
some tidings of her?"
"When are you to pay?"
"Shall I tell you plainly one thing, sir? I dread almost as
"Half the 15th of this month, half the 15th of next."
much to receive any tidings of my vessel as to remain in
"Just so; and now here are 32,500 francs payable shortly; they doubt. Uncertainty is still hope." Then in a low voice Morrel
are all signed by you, and assigned to our house by the added, -- "This delay is not natural. The Pharaon left
Calcutta the 5th of February; she ought to have been here a
holders."
month ago."
"I recognize them," said Morrel, whose face was suffused, as
he thought that, for the first time in his life, he would be "What is that?" said the Englishman. "What is the meaning of
that noise?"
unable to honor his own signature. "Is this all?"
"Oh, oh!" cried Morrel, turning pale, "what is it?" A loud
noise was heard on the stairs of people moving hastily, and
half-stifled sobs. Morrel rose and advanced to the door; but
his strength failed him and he sank into a chair. The two
men remained opposite one another, Morrel trembling in
every limb, the stranger gazing at him with an air of
profound pity. The noise had ceased; but it seemed that
Morrel expected something -- something had occasioned the
"Yes, sir," replied the Englishman. "I will not," continued he,
noise, and something must follow. The stranger fancied he
after a moment's silence, "conceal from you, that while your
heard footsteps on the stairs; and that the footsteps, which
probity and exactitude up to this moment are universally
were those of several persons, stopped at the door. A key
acknowledged, yet the report is current in Marseilles that
was inserted in the lock of the first door, and the creaking of
you are not able to meet your liabilities." At this almost
hinges was audible.
brutal speech Morrel turned deathly pale. "Sir," said he, "up
to this time -- and it is now more than four-and-twenty years "There are only two persons who have the key to that door,"
since I received the direction of this house from my father, murmured Morrel, "Cocles and Julie." At this instant the
who had himself conducted it for five and thirty years -- second door opened, and the young girl, her eyes bathed
never has anything bearing the signature of Morrel & Son with tears, appeared. Morrel rose tremblingly, supporting
himself by the arm of the chair. He would have spoken, but
been dishonored."
his voice failed him. "Oh, father!" said she, clasping her
"I know that," replied the Englishman. "But as a man of
hands, "forgive your child for being the bearer of evil
honor should answer another, tell me fairly, shall you pay
tidings."
these with the same punctuality?" Morrel shuddered, and
looked at the man, who spoke with more assurance than he Morrel again changed color. Julie threw herself into his arms.
had hitherto shown. "To questions frankly put," said he, "a "Oh, father, father!" murmured she, "courage!"
straightforward answer should be given. Yes, I shall pay, if,
as I hope, my vessel arrives safely; for its arrival will again "The Pharaon has gone down, then?" said Morrel in a hoarse
procure me the credit which the numerous accidents, of voice. The young girl did not speak; but she made an
which I have been the victim, have deprived me; but if the affirmative sign with her head as she lay on her father's
Pharaon should be lost, and this last resource be gone" -- the breast.
"No, I have for the end of the month these bills which have
been assigned to us by the house of Pascal, and the house of
Wild & Turner of Marseilles, amounting to nearly 55,000
francs; in all, 287,500 francs." It is impossible to describe
what Morrel suffered during this enumeration. "Two
hundred and eighty-seven thousand five hundred francs,"
repeated he.

poor man's eyes filled with tears.
"Well," said the other, "if this last resource fail you?"

"And the crew?" asked Morrel.

"Saved," said the girl; "saved by the crew of the vessel that
"Well," returned Morrel, "it is a cruel thing to be forced to say, has just entered the harbor." Morrel raised his two hands to
but, already used to misfortune, I must habituate myself to heaven with an expression of resignation and sublime
gratitude. "Thanks, my God," said he, "at least thou strikest
104

but me alone." A tear moistened the eye of the phlegmatic
Englishman.
"Come in, come in," said Morrel, "for I presume you are all at
the door."
Scarcely had he uttered those words than Madame Morrel
entered weeping bitterly. Emmanuel followed her, and in
the antechamber were visible the rough faces of seven or
eight half-naked sailors. At the sight of these men the
Englishman started and advanced a step; then restrained
himself, and retired into the farthest and most obscure
corner of the apartment. Madame Morrel sat down by her
husband and took one of his hands in hers, Julie still lay with
her head on his shoulder, Emmanuel stood in the centre of
the chamber and seemed to form the link between Morrel's
family and the sailors at the door.
"How did this happen?" said Morrel.
"Draw nearer, Penelon," said the young man, "and tell us all
about it."
An old seaman, bronzed by the tropical sun, advanced,
twirling the remains of a tarpaulin between his hands.
"Good-day, M. Morrel," said he, as if he had just quitted
Marseilles the previous evening, and had just returned from
Aix or Toulon.
"Good-day, Penelon," returned Morrel, who could not
refrain from smiling through his tears, "where is the
captain?"
"The captain, M. Morrel, -- he has stayed behind sick at
Palma; but please God, it won't be much, and you will see
him in a few days all alive and hearty."
"Well, now tell your story, Penelon."
Penelon rolled his quid in his cheek, placed his hand before
his mouth, turned his head, and sent a long jet of
tobacco-juice into the antechamber, advanced his foot,
balanced himself, and began, -- "You see, M. Morrel," said he,
"we were somewhere between Cape Blanc and Cape
Boyador, sailing with a fair breeze, south-south-west after a
week's calm, when Captain Gaumard comes up to me -- I
was at the helm I should tell you -- and says, `Penelon, what
do you think of those clouds coming up over there?' I was
just then looking at them myself. `What do I think, captain?
Why I think that they are rising faster than they have any
business to do, and that they would not be so black if they
didn't mean mischief.' -- `That's my opinion too,' said the
captain, `and I'll take precautions accordingly. We are
carrying too much canvas. Avast, there, all hands! Take in
the studding-sl's and stow the flying jib.' It was time; the
squall was on us, and the vessel began to heel. `Ah,' said the
captain, `we have still too much canvas set; all hands lower
the mains'l!' Five minutes after, it was down; and we sailed
under mizzen-tops'ls and to'gall'nt sails. `Well, Penelon,' said
the captain, `what makes you shake your head?' `Why,' I
says, `I still think you've got too much on.' `I think you're
right,' answered he, `we shall have a gale.' `A gale? More
than that, we shall have a tempest, or I don't know what's
what.' You could see the wind coming like the dust at
Montredon; luckily the captain understood his business.
`Take in two reefs in the tops'ls,' cried the captain; `let go the
bowlin's, haul the brace, lower the to'gall'nt sails, haul out
the reef-tackles on the yards.'"

"We did better than that, sir," said the old sailor respectfully;
"we put the helm up to run before the tempest; ten minutes
after we struck our tops'ls and scudded under bare poles."
"The vessel was very old to risk that," said the Englishman.
"Eh, it was that that did the business; after pitching heavily
for twelve hours we sprung a leak. `Penelon,' said the
captain, `I think we are sinking, give me the helm, and go
down into the hold.' I gave him the helm, and descended;
there was already three feet of water. `All hands to the
pumps!' I shouted; but it was too late, and it seemed the
more we pumped the more came in. `Ah,' said I, after four
hours' work, `since we are sinking, let us sink; we can die but
once.' `That's the example you set, Penelon,' cries the captain;
`very well, wait a minute.' He went into his cabin and came
back with a brace of pistols. `I will blow the brains out of the
first man who leaves the pump,' said he."
"Well done!" said the Englishman.
"There's nothing gives you so much courage as good
reasons," continued the sailor; "and during that time the
wind had abated, and the sea gone down, but the water kept
rising; not much, only two inches an hour, but still it rose.
Two inches an hour does not seem much, but in twelve
hours that makes two feet, and three we had before, that
makes five. `Come,' said the captain, `we have done all in
our power, and M. Morrel will have nothing to reproach us
with, we have tried to save the ship, let us now save
ourselves. To the boats, my lads, as quick as you can.' Now,"
continued Penelon, "you see, M. Morrel, a sailor is attached
to his ship, but still more to his life, so we did not wait to be
told twice; the more so, that the ship was sinking under us,
and seemed to say, `Get along -- save yourselves.' We soon
launched the boat, and all eight of us got into it. The captain
descended last, or rather, he did not descend, he would not
quit the vessel; so I took him round the waist, and threw him
into the boat, and then I jumped after him. It was time, for
just as I jumped the deck burst with a noise like the
broadside of a man-of-war. Ten minutes after she pitched
forward, then the other way, spun round and round, and
then good-by to the Pharaon. As for us, we were three days
without anything to eat or drink, so that we began to think
of drawing lots who should feed the rest, when we saw La
Gironde; we made signals of distress, she perceived us,
made for us, and took us all on board. There now, M. Morrel,
that's the whole truth, on the honor of a sailor; is not it true,
you fellows there?" A general murmur of approbation
showed that the narrator had faithfully detailed their
misfortunes and sufferings.
"Well, well," said M. Morrel, "I know there was no one in
fault but destiny. It was the will of God that this should
happen, blessed be His name. What wages are due to you?"
"Oh, don't let us talk of that, M. Morrel."
"Yes, but we will talk of it."
"Well, then, three months," said Penelon.
"Cocles, pay two hundred francs to each of these good
fellows," said Morrel. "At another time," added he, "I should
have said, `Give them, besides, two hundred francs over as a
present;' but times are changed, and the little money that
remains to me is not my own."

Penelon turned to his companions, and exchanged a few
"That was not enough for those latitudes," said the words with them.
Englishman; "I should have taken four reefs in the topsails
"As for that, M. Morrel," said he, again turning his quid, "as
and furled the spanker."
for that" -His firm, sonorous, and unexpected voice made every one
"As for what?"
start. Penelon put his hand over his eyes, and then stared at
the man who thus criticized the manoeuvres of his captain. "The money."
105


CHAPTER 29


THE HOUSE OF MORREL & SON

"Well" -"Well, we all say that fifty francs will be enough for us at
present, and that we will wait for the rest."

"Let me see," continued the stranger, "I am one of your
largest creditors."
"Your bills, at least, are the first that will fall due."

"Thanks, my friends, thanks!" cried Morrel gratefully; "take it
-- take it; and if you can find another employer, enter his
service; you are free to do so." These last words produced a
prodigious effect on the seaman. Penelon nearly swallowed
his quid; fortunately he recovered. "What, M. Morrel!" said
he in a low voice, "you send us away; you are then angry
with us!"

"Do you wish for time to pay?"

some; we'll wait for you."

"Well, renew these bills up to the 5th of September; and on
the 5th of September at eleven o'clock (the hand of the clock
pointed to eleven), I shall come to receive the money."

"A delay would save my honor, and consequently my life."
"How long a delay do you wish for?" -- Morrel reflected.
"Two months," said he.
"I will give you three," replied the stranger.

"But," asked Morrel, "will the house of Thomson & French
"No, no," said M. Morrel, "I am not angry, quite the contrary, consent?"
and I do not send you away; but I have no more ships, and
"Oh, I take everything on myself. To-day is the 5th of June."
therefore I do not want any sailors."
"No more ships!" returned Penelon; "well, then, you'll build "Yes."
"I have no money to build ships with, Penelon," said the
poor owner mournfully, "so I cannot accept your kind offer."
"No more money? Then you must not pay us; we can scud,
like the Pharaon, under bare poles."
"Enough, enough!" cried Morrel, almost overpowered; "leave
me, I pray you; we shall meet again in a happier time.
Emmanuel, go with them, and see that my orders are
executed."
"At least, we shall see each other again, M. Morrel?" asked
Penelon.
"Yes; I hope so, at least. Now go." He made a sign to Cocles,
who went first; the seamen followed him and Emmanuel
brought up the rear. "Now," said the owner to his wife and
daughter, "leave me; I wish to speak with this gentleman."
And he glanced towards the clerk of Thomson & French,
who had remained motionless in the corner during this
scene, in which he had taken no part, except the few words
we have mentioned. The two women looked at this person
whose presence they had entirely forgotten, and retired; but,
as she left the apartment, Julie gave the stranger a
supplicating glance, to which he replied by a smile that an
indifferent spectator would have been surprised to see on his
stern features. The two men were left alone. "Well, sir," said
Morrel, sinking into a chair, "you have heard all, and I have
nothing further to tell you."
"I see," returned the Englishman, "that a fresh and unmerited
misfortune has overwhelmed you, and this only increases
my desire to serve you."
"Oh, sir!" cried Morrel.

106

"I shall expect you," returned Morrel; "and I will pay you -or I shall be dead." These last words were uttered in so low a
tone that the stranger could not hear them. The bills were
renewed, the old ones destroyed, and the poor ship-owner
found himself with three months before him to collect his
resources. The Englishman received his thanks with the
phlegm peculiar to his nation; and Morrel, overwhelming
him with grateful blessings, conducted him to the staircase.
The stranger met Julie on the stairs; she pretended to be
descending, but in reality she was waiting for him. "Oh, sir"
-- said she, clasping her hands.
"Mademoiselle," said the stranger, "one day you will receive
a letter signed `Sinbad the Sailor.' Do exactly what the letter
bids you, however strange it may appear."
"Yes, sir," returned Julie.
"Do you promise?"
"I swear to you I will."
"It is well. Adieu, mademoiselle. Continue to be the good,
sweet girl you are at present, and I have great hopes that
heaven will reward you by giving you Emmanuel for a
husband."
Julie uttered a faint cry, blushed like a rose, and leaned
against the baluster. The stranger waved his hand, and
continued to descend. In the court he found Penelon, who,
with a rouleau of a hundred francs in either hand, seemed
unable to make up his mind to retain them. "Come with me,
my friend," said the Englishman; "I wish to speak to you."


Chapter 30

The Fifth Of September

T

he extension provided for by the agent of Thomson &
French, at the moment when Morrel expected it least,
was to the poor shipowner so decided a stroke of good
fortune that he almost dared to believe that fate was at
length grown weary of wasting her spite upon him. The
same day he told his wife, Emmanuel, and his daughter all
that had occurred; and a ray of hope, if not of tranquillity,
returned to the family. Unfortunately, however, Morrel had
not only engagements with the house of Thomson & French,
who had shown themselves so considerate towards him; and,
as he had said, in business he had correspondents, and not
friends. When he thought the matter over, he could by no
means account for this generous conduct on the part of
Thomson & French towards him; and could only attribute it
to some such selfish argument as this: -- "We had better help
a man who owes us nearly 300,000 francs, and have those
300,000 francs at the end of three months than hasten his
ruin, and get only six or eight per cent of our money back
again." Unfortunately, whether through envy or stupidity,
all Morrel's correspondents did not take this view; and some
even came to a contrary decision. The bills signed by Morrel
were presented at his office with scrupulous exactitude, and,
thanks to the delay granted by the Englishman, were paid by
Cocles with equal punctuality. Cocles thus remained in his
accustomed tranquillity. It was Morrel alone who
remembered with alarm, that if he had to repay on the 15th
the 50,000 francs of M. de Boville, and on the 30th the 32,500
francs of bills, for which, as well as the debt due to the
inspector of prisons, he had time granted, he must be a
ruined man.
The opinion of all the commercial men was that, under the
reverses which had successively weighed down Morrel, it
was impossible for him to remain solvent. Great, therefore,
was the astonishment when at the end of the month, he
cancelled all his obligations with his usual punctuality. Still
confidence was not restored to all minds, and the general
opinion was that the complete ruin of the unfortunate
shipowner had been postponed only until the end of the
month. The month passed, and Morrel made extraordinary
efforts to get in all his resources. Formerly his paper, at any
date, was taken with confidence, and was even in request.
Morrel now tried to negotiate bills at ninety days only, and
none of the banks would give him credit. Fortunately,
Morrel had some funds coming in on which he could rely;
and, as they reached him, he found himself in a condition to
meet his engagements when the end of July came. The agent
of Thomson & French had not been again seen at Marseilles;
the day after, or two days after his visit to Morrel, he had
disappeared; and as in that city he had had no intercourse
but with the mayor, the inspector of prisons, and M. Morrel,
his departure left no trace except in the memories of these
three persons. As to the sailors of the Pharaon, they must
have found snug berths elsewhere, for they also had
disappeared.
Captain Gaumard, recovered from his illness, had returned
from Palma. He delayed presenting himself at Morrel's, but
the owner, hearing of his arrival, went to see him. The
worthy shipowner knew, from Penelon's recital, of the
captain's brave conduct during the storm, and tried to
console him. He brought him also the amount of his wages,
which Captain Gaumard had not dared to apply for. As he
descended the staircase, Morrel met Penelon, who was going

up. Penelon had, it would seem, made good use of his
money, for he was newly clad. When he saw his employer,
the worthy tar seemed much embarrassed, drew on one side
into the corner of the landing-place, passed his quid from
one cheek to the other, stared stupidly with his great eyes,
and only acknowledged the squeeze of the hand which
Morrel as usual gave him by a slight pressure in return.
Morrel attributed Penelon's embarrassment to the elegance
of his attire; it was evident the good fellow had not gone to
such an expense on his own account; he was, no doubt,
engaged on board some other vessel, and thus his
bashfulness arose from the fact of his not having, if we may
so express ourselves, worn mourning for the Pharaon longer.
Perhaps he had come to tell Captain Gaumard of his good
luck, and to offer him employment from his new master.
"Worthy fellows!" said Morrel, as he went away, "may your
new master love you as I loved you, and be more fortunate
than I have been!"
August rolled by in unceasing efforts on the part of Morrel
to renew his credit or revive the old. On the 20th of August it
was known at Marseilles that he had left town in the
mailcoach, and then it was said that the bills would go to
protest at the end of the month, and that Morrel had gone
away and left his chief clerk Emmanuel, and his cashier
Cocles, to meet the creditors. But, contrary to all expectation,
when the 31st of August came, the house opened as usual,
and Cocles appeared behind the grating of the counter,
examined all bills presented with the usual scrutiny, and,
from first to last, paid all with the usual precision. There
came in, moreover, two drafts which M. Morrel had fully
anticipated, and which Cocles paid as punctually as the bills
which the shipowner had accepted. All this was
incomprehensible, and then, with the tenacity peculiar to
prophets of bad news, the failure was put off until the end of
September. On the 1st, Morrel returned; he was awaited by
his family with extreme anxiety, for from this journey to
Paris they hoped great things. Morrel had thought of
Danglars, who was now immensely rich, and had lain under
great obligations to Morrel in former days, since to him it
was owing that Danglars entered the service of the Spanish
banker, with whom he had laid the foundations of his vast
wealth. It was said at this moment that Danglars was worth
from six to eight millions of francs, and had unlimited credit.
Danglars, then, without taking a crown from his pocket,
could save Morrel; he had but to pass his word for a loan,
and Morrel was saved. Morrel had long thought of Danglars,
but had kept away from some instinctive motive, and had
delayed as long as possible availing himself of this last
resource. And Morrel was right, for he returned home
crushed by the humiliation of a refusal. Yet, on his arrival,
Morrel did not utter a complaint, or say one harsh word. He
embraced his weeping wife and daughter, pressed
Emmanuel's hand with friendly warmth, and then going to
his private room on the second floor had sent for Cocles.
"Then," said the two women to Emmanuel, "we are indeed
ruined."
It was agreed in a brief council held among them, that Julie
should write to her brother, who was in garrison at Nimes,
to come to them as speedily as possible. The poor women
felt instinctively that they required all their strength to
support the blow that impended. Besides, Maximilian
Morrel, though hardly two and twenty, had great influence
107


CHAPTER 30


THE FIFTH OF SEPTEMBER

over his father. He was a strong-minded, upright young man.
At the time when he decided on his profession his father had
no desire to choose for him, but had consulted young
Maximilian's taste. He had at once declared for a military life,
and had in consequence studied hard, passed brilliantly
through the Polytechnic School, and left it as sub-lieutenant
of the 53d of the line. For a year he had held this rank, and
expected promotion on the first vacancy. In his regiment
Maximilian Morrel was noted for his rigid observance, not
only of the obligations imposed on a soldier, but also of the
duties of a man; and he thus gained the name of "the stoic."
We need hardly say that many of those who gave him this
epithet repeated it because they had heard it, and did not
even know what it meant. This was the young man whom
his mother and sister called to their aid to sustain them
under the serious trial which they felt they would soon have
to endure. They had not mistaken the gravity of this event,
for the moment after Morrel had entered his private office
with Cocles, Julie saw the latter leave it pale, trembling, and
his features betraying the utmost consternation. She would
have questioned him as he passed by her, but the worthy
creature hastened down the staircase with unusual
precipitation, and only raised his hands to heaven and
exclaimed, "Oh, mademoiselle, mademoiselle, what a
dreadful misfortune! Who could ever have believed it!" A
moment afterwards Julie saw him go up-stairs carrying two
or three heavy ledgers, a portfolio, and a bag of money.

told her mother, that although he was apparently so calm,
she had noticed that her father's heart beat violently. The
next two days passed in much the same way. On the evening
of the 4th of September, M. Morrel asked his daughter for
the key of his study. Julie trembled at this request, which
seemed to her of bad omen. Why did her father ask for this
key which she always kept, and which was only taken from
her in childhood as a punishment? The young girl looked at
Morrel.

keyhole, Morrel was writing; but Madame Morrel remarked,
what her daughter had not observed, that her husband was
writing on stamped paper. The terrible idea that he was
writing his will flashed across her; she shuddered, and yet
had not strength to utter a word. Next day M. Morrel
seemed as calm as ever, went into his office as usual, came to
his breakfast punctually, and then, after dinner, he placed
his daughter beside him, took her head in his arms, and held
her for a long time against his bosom. In the evening, Julie

"Read this letter," he said, handing it to her. Julie hesitated.
"It concerns the best interests of your father," said the
messenger.

"What have I done wrong, father," she said, "that you should
take this key from me?"

"Nothing, my dear," replied the unhappy man, the tears
starting to his eyes at this simple question, -- "nothing, only I
want it." Julie made a pretence to feel for the key. "I must
have left it in my room," she said. And she went out, but
instead of going to her apartment she hastened to consult
Emmanuel. "Do not give this key to your father," said he,
"and to-morrow morning, if possible, do not quit him for a
moment." She questioned Emmanuel, but he knew nothing,
or would not say what he knew. During the night, between
the 4th and 5th of September, Madame Morrel remained
listening for every sound, and, until three o'clock in the
morning, she heard her husband pacing the room in great
agitation. It was three o'clock when he threw himself on the
bed. The mother and daughter passed the night together.
They had expected Maximilian since the previous evening.
At eight o'clock in the morning Morrel entered their chamber.
Morrel examined the ledgers, opened the portfolio, and
He was calm; but the agitation of the night was legible in his
counted the money. All his funds amounted to 6,000, or
pale and careworn visage. They did not dare to ask him how
8,000 francs, his bills receivable up to the 5th to 4,000 or 5,000,
he had slept. Morrel was kinder to his wife, more
which, making the best of everything, gave him 14,000 francs
affectionate to his daughter, than he had ever been. He could
to meet debts amounting to 287,500 francs. He had not even
not cease gazing at and kissing the sweet girl. Julie, mindful
the means for making a possible settlement on account.
of Emmanuel's request, was following her father when he
However, when Morrel went down to his dinner, he
quitted the room, but he said to her quickly, -- "Remain with
appeared very calm. This calmness was more alarming to the
your mother, dearest." Julie wished to accompany him. "I
two women than the deepest dejection would have been.
wish you to do so," said he.
After dinner Morrel usually went out and used to take his
coffee at the Phocaean club, and read the Semaphore; this This was the first time Morrel had ever so spoken, but he
said it in a tone of paternal kindness, and Julie did not dare
day he did not leave the house, but returned to his office.
to disobey. She remained at the same spot standing mute
As to Cocles, he seemed completely bewildered. For part of
and motionless. An instant afterwards the door opened, she
the day he went into the court-yard, seated himself on a
felt two arms encircle her, and a mouth pressed her forehead.
stone with his head bare and exposed to the blazing sun.
She looked up and uttered an exclamation of joy.
Emmanuel tried to comfort the women, but his eloquence
faltered. The young man was too well acquainted with the "Maximilian, my dearest brother!" she cried. At these words
business of the house, not to feel that a great catastrophe Madame Morrel rose, and threw herself into her son's arms.
hung over the Morrel family. Night came, the two women "Mother," said the young man, looking alternately at
had watched, hoping that when he left his room Morrel Madame Morrel and her daughter, "what has occurred -would come to them, but they heard him pass before their what has happened? Your letter has frightened me, and I
door, and trying to conceal the noise of his footsteps. They have come hither with all speed."
listened; he went into his sleeping-room, and fastened the "Julie," said Madame Morrel, making a sign to the young
door inside. Madame Morrel sent her daughter to bed, and man, "go and tell your father that Maximilian has just
half an hour after Julie had retired, she rose, took off her arrived." The young lady rushed out of the apartment, but
shoes, and went stealthily along the passage, to see through on the first step of the staircase she found a man holding a
the keyhole what her husband was doing. In the passage she letter in his hand.
saw a retreating shadow; it was Julie, who, uneasy herself,
had anticipated her mother. The young lady went towards "Are you not Mademoiselle Julie Morrel?" inquired the man,
with a strong Italian accent.
Madame Morrel.
"He is writing," she said. They had understood each other "Yes, sir," replied Julie with hesitation; "what is your
without speaking. Madame Morrel looked again through the pleasure? I do not know you."

108

The young girl hastily took the letter from him. She opened
it quickly and read: -"Go this moment to the Allees de Meillan, enter the house
No. 15, ask the porter for the key of the room on the fifth
floor, enter the apartment, take from the corner of the

mantelpiece a purse netted in red silk, and give it to your
father. It is important that he should receive it before eleven
o'clock. You promised to obey me implicitly. Remember
your oath.

such a point. He was thunderstruck. Then, rushing hastily
out of the apartment, he ran up-stairs, expecting to find his
father in his study, but he rapped there in vain.

While he was yet at the door of the study he heard the
bedroom door open, turned, and saw his father. Instead of
going direct to his study, M. Morrel had returned to his
The young girl uttered a joyful cry, raised her eyes, looked
bed-chamber, which he was only this moment quitting.
round to question the messenger, but he had disappeared.
Morrel uttered a cry of surprise at the sight of his son, of
She cast her eyes again over the note to peruse it a second
whose arrival he was ignorant. He remained motionless on
time, and saw there was a postscript. She read: -the spot, pressing with his left hand something he had
"It is important that you should fulfil this mission in person concealed under his coat. Maximilian sprang down the
and alone. If you go accompanied by any other person, or staircase, and threw his arms round his father's neck; but
should any one else go in your place, the porter will reply suddenly he recoiled, and placed his right hand on Morrel's
that he does not know anything about it."
breast. "Father," he exclaimed, turning pale as death, "what
This postscript decreased greatly the young girl's happiness. are you going to do with that brace of pistols under your
Was there nothing to fear? Was there not some snare laid for coat?"
her? Her innocence had kept her in ignorance of the dangers "Oh, this is what I feared!" said Morrel.
that might assail a young girl of her age. But there is no need
"Father, father, in heaven's name," exclaimed the young man,
to know danger in order to fear it; indeed, it may be
"what are these weapons for?"
observed, that it is usually unknown perils that inspire the
greatest terror.
"Maximilian," replied Morrel, looking fixedly at his son, "you
are a man, and a man of honor. Come, and I will explain to
Julie hesitated, and resolved to take counsel. Yet, through a
you."
singular impulse, it was neither to her mother nor her
brother that she applied, but to Emmanuel. She hastened And with a firm step Morrel went up to his study, while
down and told him what had occurred on the day when the Maximilian followed him, trembling as he went. Morrel
agent of Thomson & French had come to her father's, related opened the door, and closed it behind his son; then, crossing
the scene on the staircase, repeated the promise she had the anteroom, went to his desk on which he placed the
made, and showed him the letter. "You must go, then, pistols, and pointed with his finger to an open ledger. In this
mademoiselle," said Emmanuel.
ledger was made out an exact balance-sheet of his affair's.
Morrel had to pay, within half an hour, 287,500 francs. All he
"Go there?" murmured Julie.
possessed was 15,257 francs. "Read!" said Morrel.
"Yes; I will accompany you."
The young man was overwhelmed as he read. Morrel said
"But did you not read that I must be alone?" said Julie.
not a word. What could he say? What need he add to such a
"And you shall be alone," replied the young man. "I will desperate proof in figures? "And have you done all that is
await you at the corner of the Rue de Musee, and if you are possible, father, to meet this disastrous result?" asked the
so long absent as to make me uneasy, I will hasten to rejoin young man, after a moment's pause. "I have," replied Morrel.
"Sinbad the Sailor."

you, and woe to him of whom you shall have cause to
complain to me!"

"You have no money coming in on which you can rely?"

Emmanuel hesitated a moment, but his desire to make Julie
decide immediately made him reply.

"You are right, father; I understand you." Then extending his
hand towards one of the pistols, he said, "There is one for
you and one for me -- thanks!" Morrel caught his hand.
"Your mother -- your sister! Who will support them?" A
shudder ran through the young man's frame. "Father," he
said, "do you reflect that you are bidding me to live?"

"None."
"Then, Emmanuel?" said the young girl with hesitation, "it is
"You have exhausted every resource?"
your opinion that I should obey this invitation?"
"All."
"Yes. Did not the messenger say your father's safety
depended upon it?"
"And in half an hour," said Maximilian in a gloomy voice,
"our name is dishonored!"
"But what danger threatens him, then, Emmanuel?" she
asked.
"Blood washes out dishonor," said Morrel.

"Listen," he said; "to-day is the 5th of September, is it not?"
"Yes."
"To-day, then, at eleven o'clock, your father has nearly three
hundred thousand francs to pay?"

"Yes, I do so bid you," answered Morrel, "it is your duty. You
have a calm, strong mind, Maximilian. Maximilian, you are
"Yes, we know that."
no ordinary man. I make no requests or commands; I only
"Well, then," continued Emmanuel, "we have not fifteen ask you to examine my position as if it were your own, and
thousand francs in the house."
then judge for yourself."
"What will happen then?"
The young man reflected for a moment, then an expression
"Why, if to-day before eleven o'clock your father has not
found someone who will come to his aid, he will be
compelled at twelve o'clock to declare himself a bankrupt."
"Oh, come, then, come!" cried she, hastening away with the
young man. During this time, Madame Morrel had told her
son everything. The young man knew quite well that, after
the succession of misfortunes which had befallen his father,
great changes had taken place in the style of living and
housekeeping; but he did not know that matters had reached

of sublime resignation appeared in his eyes, and with a slow
and sad gesture he took off his two epaulets, the insignia of
his rank. "Be it so, then, my father," he said, extending his
hand to Morrel, "die in peace, my father; I will live." Morrel
was about to cast himself on his knees before his son, but
Maximilian caught him in his arms, and those two noble
hearts were pressed against each other for a moment. "You
know it is not my fault," said Morrel. Maximilian smiled. "I
know, father, you are the most honorable man I have ever
109


CHAPTER 30


THE FIFTH OF SEPTEMBER

known."

dishonored by delay, and death is preferable to shame!'"

"Good, my son. And now there is no more to be said; go and
rejoin your mother and sister."

"Yes, yes," said the young man, "yes;" and once again
embracing his father with convulsive pressure, he said, "Be it
so, my father."

"My father," said the young man, bending his knee, "bless
me!" Morrel took the head of his son between his two hands,
drew him forward, and kissing his forehead several times
said, "Oh, yes, yes, I bless you in my own name, and in the
name of three generations of irreproachable men, who say
through me, `The edifice which misfortune has destroyed,
providence may build up again.' On seeing me die such a
death, the most inexorable will have pity on you. To you,
perhaps, they will accord the time they have refused to me.
Then do your best to keep our name free from dishonor. Go
to work, labor, young man, struggle ardently and
courageously; live, yourself, your mother and sister, with the
most rigid economy, so that from day to day the property of
those whom I leave in your hands may augment and fructify.
Reflect how glorious a day it will be, how grand, how
solemn, that day of complete restoration, on which you will
say in this very office, `My father died because he could not
do what I have this day done; but he died calmly and
peaceably, because in dying he knew what I should do.'"
"My father, my father!" cried the young man, "why should
you not live?"
"If I live, all would be changed; if I live, interest would be
converted into doubt, pity into hostility; if I live I am only a
man who has broken his word, failed in his engagements -in fact, only a bankrupt. If, on the contrary, I die, remember,
Maximilian, my corpse is that of an honest but unfortunate
man. Living, my best friends would avoid my house; dead,
all Marseilles will follow me in tears to my last home. Living,
you would feel shame at my name; dead, you may raise your
head and say, `I am the son of him you killed, because, for
the first time, he has been compelled to break his word.'"
The young man uttered a groan, but appeared resigned.
"And now," said Morrel, "leave me alone, and endeavor to
keep your mother and sister away."
"Will you not see my sister once more?" asked Maximilian. A
last but final hope was concealed by the young man in the
effect of this interview, and therefore he had suggested it.
Morrel shook his head. "I saw her this morning, and bade
her adieu."
"Have you no particular commands to leave with me, my
father?" inquired Maximilian in a faltering voice.
"Yes; my son, and a sacred command."
"Say it, my father."

And he rushed out of the study. When his son had left him,
Morrel remained an instant standing with his eyes fixed on
the door; then putting forth his arm, he pulled the bell. After
a moment's interval, Cocles appeared.
It was no longer the same man -- the fearful revelations of
the three last days had crushed him. This thought -- the
house of Morrel is about to stop payment -- bent him to the
earth more than twenty years would otherwise have done.
"My worthy Cocles," said Morrel in a tone impossible to
describe, "do you remain in the ante-chamber. When the
gentleman who came three months ago -- the agent of
Thomson & French -- arrives, announce his arrival to me."
Cocles made no reply; he made a sign with his head, went
into the anteroom, and seated himself. Morrel fell back in his
chair, his eyes fixed on the clock; there were seven minutes
left, that was all. The hand moved on with incredible
rapidity, he seemed to see its motion.
What passed in the mind of this man at the supreme
moment of his agony cannot be told in words. He was still
comparatively young, he was surrounded by the loving care
of a devoted family, but he had convinced himself by a
course of reasoning, illogical perhaps, yet certainly plausible,
that he must separate himself from all he held dear in the
world, even life itself. To form the slightest idea of his
feelings, one must have seen his face with its expression of
enforced resignation and its tear-moistened eyes raised to
heaven. The minute hand moved on. The pistols were
loaded; he stretched forth his hand, took one up, and
murmured his daughter's name. Then he laid it down seized
his pen, and wrote a few words. It seemed to him as if he
had not taken a sufficient farewell of his beloved daughter.
Then he turned again to the clock, counting time now not by
minutes, but by seconds. He took up the deadly weapon
again, his lips parted and his eyes fixed on the clock, and
then shuddered at the click of the trigger as he cocked the
pistol. At this moment of mortal anguish the cold sweat
came forth upon his brow, a pang stronger than death
clutched at his heart-strings. He heard the door of the
staircase creak on its hinges -- the clock gave its warning to
strike eleven -- the door of his study opened; Morrel did not
turn round -- he expected these words of Cocles, "The agent
of Thomson & French."
He placed the muzzle of the pistol between his teeth.
Suddenly he heard a cry -- it was his daughter's voice. He
turned and saw Julie. The pistol fell from his hands. "My
father!" cried the young girl, out of breath, and half dead
with joy -- "saved, you are saved!" And she threw herself
into his arms, holding in her extended hand a red, netted silk
purse.

"The house of Thomson & French is the only one who, from
humanity, or, it may be, selfishness -- it is not for me to read
men's hearts -- has had any pity for me. Its agent, who will in
ten minutes present himself to receive the amount of a bill of
287,500 francs, I will not say granted, but offered me three
months. Let this house be the first repaid, my son, and "Saved, my child!" said Morrel; "what do you mean?"
respect this man."
"Yes, saved -- saved! See, see!" said the young girl.
"Father, I will," said Maximilian.
Morrel took the purse, and started as he did so, for a vague
"And now, once more, adieu," said Morrel. "Go, leave me; I remembrance reminded him that it once belonged to himself.
would be alone. You will find my will in the secretary in my At one end was the receipted bill for the 287,000 francs, and
bedroom."
at the other was a diamond as large as a hazel-nut, with
The young man remained standing and motionless, having these words on a small slip of parchment: -- Julie's Dowry.
but the force of will and not the power of execution.
Morrel passed his hand over his brow; it seemed to him a
"Hear me, Maximilian," said his father. "Suppose I was a
soldier like you, and ordered to carry a certain redoubt, and
you knew I must be killed in the assault, would you not say
to me, as you said just now, `Go, father; for you are
110

dream. At this moment the clock struck eleven. He felt as if
each stroke of the hammer fell upon his heart. "Explain, my
child," he said, "Explain, my child," he said, "explain -- where
did you find this purse?"

"In a house in the Allees de Meillan, No. 15, on the corner of study. In a moment they were at the Cannebiere. There was
a mantelpiece in a small room on the fifth floor."
a crowd on the pier. All the crowd gave way before Morrel.
"The Pharaon, the Pharaon!" said every voice.
"But," cried Morrel, "this purse is not yours!" Julie handed to
her father the letter she had received in the morning.
And, wonderful to see, in front of the tower of Saint-Jean,
was a ship bearing on her stern these words, printed in
"And did you go alone?" asked Morrel, after he had read it.
white letters, "The Pharaon, Morrel & Son, of Marseilles."
"Emmanuel accompanied me, father. He was to have waited She was the exact duplicate of the other Pharaon, and loaded,
for me at the corner of the Rue de Musee, but, strange to say, as that had been, with cochineal and indigo. She cast anchor,
he was not there when I returned."
clued up sails, and on the deck was Captain Gaumard giving
"Monsieur Morrel!" exclaimed a voice on the stairs. -- orders, and good old Penelon making signals to M. Morrel.
To doubt any longer was impossible; there was the evidence
"Monsieur Morrel!"
of the senses, and ten thousand persons who came to
"It is his voice!" said Julie. At this moment Emmanuel corroborate the testimony. As Morrel and his son embraced
entered, his countenance full of animation and joy. "The on the pier-head, in the presence and amid the applause of
Pharaon!" he cried; "the Pharaon!"
the whole city witnessing this event, a man, with his face
"What -- what -- the Pharaon! Are you mad, Emmanuel? You half-covered by a black beard, and who, concealed behind
the sentry-box, watched the scene with delight, uttered these
know the vessel is lost."
words in a low tone: "Be happy, noble heart, be blessed for
"The Pharaon, sir -- they signal the Pharaon! The Pharaon is
all the good thou hast done and wilt do hereafter, and let my
entering the harbor!" Morrel fell back in his chair, his
gratitude remain in obscurity like your good deeds."
strength was failing him; his understanding weakened by
such events, refused to comprehend such incredible, And with a smile expressive of supreme content, he left his
unheard-of, fabulous facts. But his son came in. "Father," hiding-place, and without being observed, descended one of
cried Maximilian, "how could you say the Pharaon was lost? the flights of steps provided for debarkation, and hailing
The lookout has signalled her, and they say she is now three times, shouted "Jacopo, Jacopo, Jacopo!" Then a launch
came to shore, took him on board, and conveyed him to a
coming into port."
yacht splendidly fitted up, on whose deck he sprung with
"My dear friends," said Morrel, "if this be so, it must be a
the activity of a sailor; thence he once again looked towards
miracle of heaven! Impossible, impossible!"
Morrel, who, weeping with joy, was shaking hands most
But what was real and not less incredible was the purse he cordially with all the crowd around him, and thanking with
held in his hand, the acceptance receipted -- the splendid a look the unknown benefactor whom he seemed to be
diamond.
seeking in the skies. "And now," said the unknown, "farewell
"Ah, sir," exclaimed Cocles, "what can it mean? -- the kindness, humanity, and gratitude! Farewell to all the
feelings that expand the heart! I have been heaven's
Pharaon?"
substitute to recompense the good -- now the god of
"Come, dear ones," said Morrel, rising from his seat, "let us vengeance yields to me his power to punish the wicked!" At
go and see, and heaven have pity upon us if it be false these words he gave a signal, and, as if only awaiting this
intelligence!" They all went out, and on the stairs met signal, the yacht instantly put out to sea.
Madame Morrel, who had been afraid to go up into the

111


CHAPTER 31


Chapter 31

ITALY: SINBAD THE SAILOR

Italy: Sinbad The Sailor

T

owards the beginning of the year 1838, two young men
belonging to the first society of Paris, the Vicomte Albert
de Morcerf and the Baron Franz d'Epinay, were at Florence.
They had agreed to see the Carnival at Rome that year, and
that Franz, who for the last three or four years had inhabited
Italy, should act as cicerone to Albert. As it is no
inconsiderable affair to spend the Carnival at Rome,
especially when you have no great desire to sleep on the
Piazza del Popolo, or the Campo Vaccino, they wrote to
Signor Pastrini, the proprietor of the Hotel de Londres,
Piazza di Spagna, to reserve comfortable apartments for
them. Signor Pastrini replied that he had only two rooms
and a parlor on the third floor, which he offered at the low
charge of a louis per diem. They accepted his offer; but
wishing to make the best use of the time that was left, Albert
started for Naples. As for Franz, he remained at Florence,
and after having passed a few days in exploring the paradise
of the Cascine, and spending two or three evenings at the
houses of the Florentine nobility, he took a fancy into his
head (having already visited Corsica, the cradle of Bonaparte)
to visit Elba, the waiting-place of Napoleon.
One evening he cast off the painter of a sailboat from the
iron ring that secured it to the dock at Leghorn, wrapped
himself in his coat and lay down, and said to the crew, -- "To
the Island of Elba!" The boat shot out of the harbor like a bird
and the next morning Franz disembarked at Porto-Ferrajo.
He traversed the island, after having followed the traces
which the footsteps of the giant have left, and re-embarked
for Marciana. Two hours after he again landed at Pianosa,
where he was assured that red partridges abounded. The
sport was bad; Franz only succeeded in killing a few
partridges, and, like every unsuccessful sportsman, he
returned to the boat very much out of temper. "Ah, if your
excellency chose," said the captain, "you might have capital
sport."
"Where?"

"On shore in the grottos, or on board in your cloak; besides,
if your excellency pleases, we can leave as soon as you like -we can sail as well by night as by day, and if the wind drops
we can use our oars."
As Franz had sufficient time, and his apartments at Rome
were not yet available, he accepted the proposition. Upon his
answer in the affirmative, the sailors exchanged a few words
together in a low tone. "Well," asked he, "what now? Is there
any difficulty in the way?"
"No," replied the captain, "but we must warn your excellency
that the island is an infected port."
"What do you mean?"
"Monte Cristo although uninhabited, yet serves occasionally
as a refuge for the smugglers and pirates who come from
Corsica, Sardinia, and Africa, and if it becomes known that
we have been there, we shall have to perform quarantine for
six days on our return to Leghorn."
"The deuce! That puts a different face on the matter. Six days!
Why, that's as long as the Almighty took to make the world!
Too long a wait -- too long."
"But who will say your excellency has been to Monte
Cristo?"
"Oh, I shall not," cried Franz.
"Nor I, nor I," chorused the sailors.
"Then steer for Monte Cristo."
The captain gave his orders, the helm was put up, and the
boat was soon sailing in the direction of the island. Franz
waited until all was in order, and when the sail was filled,
and the four sailors had taken their places -- three forward,
and one at the helm -- he resumed the conversation.
"Gaetano," said he to the captain, "you tell me Monte Cristo
serves as a refuge for pirates, who are, it seems to me, a very
different kind of game from the goats."

"Do you see that island?" continued the captain, pointing to a "Yes, your excellency, and it is true."
conical pile rising from the indigo sea.
"I knew there were smugglers, but I thought that since the
"Well, what is this island?"
capture of Algiers, and the destruction of the regency,
pirates existed only in the romances of Cooper and Captain
"The Island of Monte Cristo."
Marryat."
"But I have no permission to shoot over this island."
"Your excellency is mistaken; there are pirates, like the
"Your excellency does not require a permit, for the island is
bandits who were believed to have been exterminated by
uninhabited."
Pope Leo XII., and who yet, every day, rob travellers at the
"Ah, indeed!" said the young man. "A desert island in the gates of Rome. Has not your excellency heard that the
midst of the Mediterranean must be a curiosity."
French charge d'affaires was robbed six months ago within
"It is very natural; this island is a mass of rocks, and does not five hundred paces of Velletri?"
contain an acre of land capable of cultivation."

"Oh, yes, I heard that."

"To whom does this island belong?"

"Well, then, if, like us, your excellency lived at Leghorn, you
would hear, from time to time, that a little merchant vessel,
"To Tuscany."
or an English yacht that was expected at Bastia, at
"What game shall I find there!"
Porto-Ferrajo, or at Civita Vecchia, has not arrived; no one
knows what has become of it, but, doubtless, it has struck on
"Thousands of wild goats."
a rock and foundered. Now this rock it has met has been a
"Who live upon the stones, I suppose," said Franz with an
long and narrow boat, manned by six or eight men, who
incredulous smile.
have surprised and plundered it, some dark and stormy
"No, but by browsing the shrubs and trees that grow out of night, near some desert and gloomy island, as bandits
the crevices of the rocks."
plunder a carriage in the recesses of a forest."
"Where can I sleep?"
112

"But," asked Franz, who lay wrapped in his cloak at the

bottom of the boat, "why do not those who have been of this obscurity Franz was not without uneasiness -- Corsica
plundered complain to the French, Sardinian, or Tuscan had long since disappeared, and Monte Cristo itself was
governments?"
invisible; but the sailors seemed, like the lynx, to see in the
dark, and the pilot who steered did not evince the slightest
"Why?" said Gaetano with a smile.
hesitation. An hour had passed since the sun had set, when
"Yes, why?"
Franz fancied he saw, at a quarter of a mile to the left, a dark
"Because, in the first place, they transfer from the vessel to mass, but he could not precisely make out what it was, and
their own boat whatever they think worth taking, then they fearing to excite the mirth of the sailors by mistaking a
bind the crew hand and foot, they attach to every one's neck floating cloud for land, he remained silent; suddenly a great
a four and twenty pound ball, a large hole is chopped in the light appeared on the strand; land might resemble a cloud,
vessel's bottom, and then they leave her. At the end of ten but the fire was not a meteor. "What is this light?" asked he.
minutes the vessel begins to roll heavily and settle down.
First one gun'l goes under, then the other. Then they lift and
sink again, and both go under at once. All at once there's a
noise like a cannon -- that's the air blowing up the deck.
Soon the water rushes out of the scupper-holes like a whale
spouting, the vessel gives a last groan, spins round and
round, and disappears, forming a vast whirlpool in the
ocean, and then all is over, so that in five minutes nothing
but the eye of God can see the vessel where she lies at the
bottom of the sea. Do you understand now," said the captain,
"why no complaints are made to the government, and why
the vessel never reaches port?"
It is probable that if Gaetano had related this previous to
proposing the expedition, Franz would have hesitated, but
now that they had started, he thought it would be cowardly
to draw back. He was one of those men who do not rashly
court danger, but if danger presents itself, combat it with the
most unalterable coolness. Calm and resolute, he treated any
peril as he would an adversary in a duel, -- calculated its
probable method of approach; retreated, if at all, as a point
of strategy and not from cowardice; was quick to see an
opening for attack, and won victory at a single thrust. "Bah!"
said he, "I have travelled through Sicily and Calabria -- I
have sailed two months in the Archipelago, and yet I never
saw even the shadow of a bandit or a pirate."

"Hush!" said the captain; "it is a fire."
"But you told me the island was uninhabited?"
"l said there were no fixed habitations on it, but I said also
that it served sometimes as a harbor for smugglers."
"And for pirates?"
"And for pirates," returned Gaetano, repeating Franz's words.
"It is for that reason I have given orders to pass the island,
for, as you see, the fire is behind us."
"But this fire?" continued Franz. "It seems to me rather
reassuring than otherwise; men who did not wish to be seen
would not light a fire."
"Oh, that goes for nothing," said Gaetano. "If you can guess
the position of the island in the darkness, you will see that
the fire cannot be seen from the side or from Pianosa, but
only from the sea."
"You think, then, this fire indicates the presence of
unpleasant neighbors?"
"That is what we must find out," returned Gaetano, fixing his
eyes on this terrestrial star.
"How can you find out?"

"You shall see." Gaetano consulted with his companions, and
after five minutes' discussion a manoeuvre was executed
"I did not tell your excellency this to deter you from your
which caused the vessel to tack about, they returned the way
project," replied Gaetano, "but you questioned me, and I
they had come, and in a few minutes the fire disappeared,
have answered; that's all."
hidden by an elevation of the land. The pilot again changed
"Yes, and your conversation is most interesting; and as I the course of the boat, which rapidly approached the island,
wish to enjoy it as long as possible, steer for Monte Cristo."
and was soon within fifty paces of it. Gaetano lowered the
The wind blew strongly, the boat made six or seven knots an sail, and the boat came to rest. All this was done in silence,
hour, and they were rapidly reaching the end of their voyage. and from the moment that their course was changed not a
As they drew near the island seemed to lift from the sea, and word was spoken.
the air was so clear that they could already distinguish the Gaetano, who had proposed the expedition, had taken all the
rocks heaped on one another, like cannon balls in an arsenal, responsibility on himself; the four sailors fixed their eyes on
with green bushes and trees growing in the crevices. As for him, while they got out their oars and held themselves in
the sailors, although they appeared perfectly tranquil yet it readiness to row away, which, thanks to the darkness, would
was evident that they were on the alert, and that they not be difficult. As for Franz, he examined his arms with the
carefully watched the glassy surface over which they were utmost coolness; he had two double-barrelled guns and a
sailing, and on which a few fishing-boats, with their white rifle; he loaded them, looked at the priming, and waited
sails, were alone visible. They were within fifteen miles of quietly. During this time the captain had thrown off his vest
Monte Cristo when the sun began to set behind Corsica, and shirt, and secured his trousers round his waist; his feet
whose mountains appeared against the sky, showing their were naked, so he had no shoes and stockings to take off;
rugged peaks in bold relief; this mass of rock, like the giant after these preparations he placed his finger on his lips, and
Adamastor, rose dead ahead, a formidable barrier, and lowering himself noiselessly into the sea, swam towards the
intercepting the light that gilded its massive peaks so that shore with such precaution that it was impossible to hear the
the voyagers were in shadow. Little by little the shadow rose slightest sound; he could only be traced by the
higher and seemed to drive before it the last rays of the phosphorescent line in his wake. This track soon
expiring day; at last the reflection rested on the summit of disappeared; it was evident that he had touched the shore.
the mountain, where it paused an instant, like the fiery crest Every one on board remained motionless for half an hour,
of a volcano, then gloom gradually covered the summit as it when the same luminous track was again observed, and the
had covered the base, and the island now only appeared to swimmer was soon on board. "Well?" exclaimed Franz and
be a gray mountain that grew continually darker; half an the sailors in unison.
hour after, the night was quite dark.
"They are Spanish smugglers," said he; "they have with them
Fortunately, the mariners were used to these latitudes, and two Corsican bandits."
knew every rock in the Tuscan Archipelago; for in the midst
"And what are these Corsican bandits doing here with
113


CHAPTER 31


ITALY: SINBAD THE SAILOR

Spanish smugglers?"

was between two possible sources of danger, he kept his eye
on the crew, and his gun in his hand. The sailors had again
"Alas," returned the captain with an accent of the most
hoisted sail, and the vessel was once more cleaving the
profound pity, "we ought always to help one another. Very
waves. Through the darkness Franz, whose eyes were now
often the bandits are hard pressed by gendarmes or
more accustomed to it, could see the looming shore along
carbineers; well, they see a vessel, and good fellows like us
which the boat was sailing, and then, as they rounded a
on board, they come and demand hospitality of us; you can't
rocky point, he saw the fire more brilliant than ever, and
refuse help to a poor hunted devil; we receive them, and for
about it five or six persons seated. The blaze illumined the
greater security we stand out to sea. This costs us nothing,
sea for a hundred paces around. Gaetano skirted the light,
and saves the life, or at least the liberty, of a fellow-creature,
carefully keeping the boat in the shadow; then, when they
who on the first occasion returns the service by pointing out
were opposite the fire, he steered to the centre of the circle,
some safe spot where we can land our goods without
singing a fishing song, of which his companions sung the
interruption."
chorus. At the first words of the song the men seated round
"Ah!" said Franz, "then you are a smuggler occasionally, the fire arose and approached the landing-place, their eyes
Gaetano?"
fixed on the boat, evidently seeking to know who the
"Your excellency, we must live somehow," returned the new-comers were and what were their intentions. They soon
appeared satisfied and returned (with the exception of one,
other, smiling impenetrably.
who remained at the shore) to their fire, at which the carcass
"Then you know the men who are now on Monte Cristo?"
of a goat was roasting. When the boat was within twenty
"Oh, yes, we sailors are like freemasons, and recognize each paces of the shore, the man on the beach, who carried a
carbine, presented arms after the manner of a sentinel, and
other by signs."
cried, "Who comes there?" in Sardinian. Franz coolly cocked
"And do you think we have nothing to fear if we land?"
both barrels. Gaetano then exchanged a few words with this
"Nothing at all; smugglers are not thieves."
man which the traveller did not understand, but which
"But these two Corsican bandits?" said Franz, calculating the evidently concerned him. "Will your excellency give your
name, or remain incognito?" asked the captain.
chances of peril.
"My name must rest unknown, -- merely say I am a
Frenchman travelling for pleasure." As soon as Gaetano had
transmitted this answer, the sentinel gave an order to one of
"How so?"
the men seated round the fire, who rose and disappeared
"Because they are pursued for having made a stiff, as if it among the rocks. Not a word was spoken, every one seemed
occupied, Franz with his disembarkment, the sailors with
was not in a Corsican's nature to revenge himself."
their sails, the smugglers with their goat; but in the midst of
"What do you mean by having made a stiff? -- having
all this carelessness it was evident that they mutually
assassinated a man?" said Franz, continuing his
observed each other. The man who had disappeared
investigation.
returned suddenly on the opposite side to that by which he
"I mean that they have killed an enemy, which is a very had left; he made a sign with his head to the sentinel, who,
different thing," returned the captain.
turning to the boat, said, "S'accommodi." The Italian
s'accommodi is untranslatable; it means at once, "Come,
"Well," said the young man, "let us demand hospitality of
these smugglers and bandits. Do you think they will grant enter, you are welcome; make yourself at home; you are the
master." It is like that Turkish phrase of Moliere's that so
it?"
astonished the bourgeois gentleman by the number of things
"Without doubt."
implied in its utterance. The sailors did not wait for a second
invitation; four strokes of the oar brought them to land;
"How many are they?"
Gaetano sprang to shore, exchanged a few words with the
"Four, and the two bandits make six."
sentinel, then his comrades disembarked, and lastly came
"Just our number, so that if they prove troublesome, we shall Franz. One of his guns was swung over his shoulder,
be able to hold them in check; so, for the last time, steer to Gaetano had the other, and a sailor held his rifle; his dress,
half artist, half dandy, did not excite any suspicion, and,
Monte Cristo."
consequently, no disquietude. The boat was moored to the
"Yes, but your excellency will permit us to take all due
shore, and they advanced a few paces to find a comfortable
precautions."
bivouac; but, doubtless, the spot they chose did not suit the
"By all means, be as wise as Nestor and as prudent as smuggler who filled the post of sentinel, for he cried out,
Ulysses; I do more than permit, I exhort you."
"Not that way, if you please."
"It is not their fault that they are bandits, but that of the
authorities."

"Silence, then!" said Gaetano.
Every one obeyed. For a man who, like Franz, viewed his
position in its true light, it was a grave one. He was alone in
the darkness with sailors whom he did not know, and who
had no reason to be devoted to him; who knew that he had
several thousand francs in his belt, and who had often
examined his weapons, -- which were very beautiful, -- if not
with envy, at least with curiosity. On the other hand, he was
about to land, without any other escort than these men, on
an island which had, indeed, a very religious name, but
which did not seem to Franz likely to afford him much
hospitality, thanks to the smugglers and bandits. The history
of the scuttled vessels, which had appeared improbable
during the day, seemed very probable at night; placed as he
114

Gaetano faltered an excuse, and advanced to the opposite
side, while two sailors kindled torches at the fire to light
them on their way. They advanced about thirty paces, and
then stopped at a small esplanade surrounded with rocks, in
which seats had been cut, not unlike sentry-boxes. Around in
the crevices of the rocks grew a few dwarf oaks and thick
bushes of myrtles. Franz lowered a torch, and saw by the
mass of cinders that had accumulated that he was not the
first to discover this retreat, which was, doubtless, one of the
halting-places of the wandering visitors of Monte Cristo. As
for his suspicions, once on terra firma, once that he had seen
the indifferent, if not friendly, appearance of his hosts, his
anxiety had quite disappeared, or rather, at sight of the goat,
had turned to appetite. He mentioned this to Gaetano, who
replied that nothing could be more easy than to prepare a

supper when they had in their boat, bread, wine, half a
dozen partridges, and a good fire to roast them by. "Besides,"
added he, "if the smell of their roast meat tempts you, I will
go and offer them two of our birds for a slice."
"You are a born diplomat," returned Franz; "go and try."
Meanwhile the sailors had collected dried sticks and
branches with which they made a fire. Franz waited
impatiently, inhaling the aroma of the roasted meat, when
the captain returned with a mysterious air.

with the air of a man proud of his office, and asked him how
these men had landed, as no vessel of any kind was visible.
"Never mind that," returned the sailor, "I know their vessel."
"Is it a very beautiful vessel?"
"I would not wish for a better to sail round the world."
"Of what burden is she?"
"About a hundred tons; but she is built to stand any weather.
She is what the English call a yacht."

"Well," said Franz, "anything new? -- do they refuse?"

"Where was she built?"

"On the contrary," returned Gaetano, "the chief, who was
told you were a young Frenchman, invites you to sup with
him."

"I know not; but my own opinion is she is a Genoese."

"Well," observed Franz, "this chief is very polite, and I see no
objection -- the more so as I bring my share of the supper."
"Oh, it is not that; he has plenty, and to spare, for supper; but
he makes one condition, and rather a peculiar one, before he
will receive you at his house."
"His house? Has he built one here, then?"
"No; but he has a very comfortable one all the same, so they
say."

"And how did a leader of smugglers," continued Franz,
"venture to build a vessel designed for such a purpose at
Genoa?"
"I did not say that the owner was a smuggler," replied the
sailor.
"No; but Gaetano did, I thought."
"Gaetano had only seen the vessel from a distance, he had
not then spoken to any one."
"And if this person be not a smuggler, who is he?"

"You know this chief, then?"

"A wealthy signor, who travels for his pleasure."

"I have heard talk of him."

"Come," thought Franz, "he is still more mysterious, since the
two accounts do not agree."

"Favorably or otherwise?"
"Both."
"The deuce! -- and what is this condition?"

"What is his name?"
"If you ask him he says Sinbad the Sailor; but I doubt if it be
his real name."

"That you are blindfolded, and do not take off the bandage
until he himself bids you." Franz looked at Gaetano, to see, if
possible, what he thought of this proposal. "Ah," replied he,
guessing Franz's thought, "I know this is a serious matter."

"Sinbad the Sailor?"

"What should you do in my place?"

"On the sea."

"I, who have nothing to lose, -- I should go."

"What country does he come from?"

"You would accept?"

"I do not know."

"Yes, were it only out of curiosity."

"Have you ever seen him?"

"There is something very peculiar about this chief, then?"

"Sometimes."

"Listen," said Gaetano, lowering his voice, "I do not know if
what they say is true" -- he stopped to see if any one was
near.

"What sort of a man is he?"

"What do they say?"
"That this chief inhabits a cavern to which the Pitti Palace is
nothing."
"What nonsense!" said Franz, reseating himself.

"Yes."
"And where does he reside?"

"Your excellency will judge for yourself."
"Where will he receive me?"
"No doubt in the subterranean palace Gaetano told you of."
"Have you never had the curiosity, when you have landed
and found this island deserted, to seek for this enchanted
palace?"

"It is no nonsense; it is quite true. Cama, the pilot of the Saint
"Oh, yes, more than once, but always in vain; we examined
Ferdinand, went in once, and he came back amazed, vowing
the grotto all over, but we never could find the slightest trace
that such treasures were only to be heard of in fairy tales."
of any opening; they say that the door is not opened by a key,
"Do you know," observed Franz, "that with such stories you but a magic word."
make me think of Ali Baba's enchanted cavern?"
"Decidedly," muttered Franz, "this is an Arabian Nights'
"I tell you what I have been told."
adventure."
"Then you advise me to accept?"

"His excellency waits for you," said a voice, which he
"Oh, I don't say that; your excellency will do as you please; I recognized as that of the sentinel. He was accompanied by
should be sorry to advise you in the matter." Franz pondered two of the yacht's crew. Franz drew his handkerchief from
the matter for a few moments, concluded that a man so rich his pocket, and presented it to the man who had spoken to
could not have any intention of plundering him of what little him. Without uttering a word, they bandaged his eyes with a
he had, and seeing only the prospect of a good supper, care that showed their apprehensions of his committing
accepted. Gaetano departed with the reply. Franz was some indiscretion. Afterwards he was made to promise that
prudent, and wished to learn all he possibly could he would not make the least attempt to raise the bandage.
concerning his host. He turned towards the sailor, who, He promised. Then his two guides took his arms, and he
during this dialogue, had sat gravely plucking the partridges went on, guided by them, and preceded by the sentinel.
115


CHAPTER 31


ITALY: SINBAD THE SAILOR

After going about thirty paces, he smelt the appetizing odor
of the kid that was roasting, and knew thus that he was
passing the bivouac; they then led him on about fifty paces
farther, evidently advancing towards that part of the shore
where they would not allow Gaetano to go -- a refusal he
could now comprehend. Presently, by a change in the
atmosphere, he knew that they were entering a cave; after
going on for a few seconds more he heard a crackling, and it
seemed to him as though the atmosphere again changed,
and became balmy and perfumed. At length his feet touched
on a thick and soft carpet, and his guides let go their hold of
him. There was a moment's silence, and then a voice, in
excellent French, although, with a foreign accent, said,
"Welcome, sir. I beg you will remove your bandage." It may
be supposed, then, Franz did not wait for a repetition of this
permission, but took off the handkerchief, and found himself
in the presence of a man from thirty-eight to forty years of
age, dressed in a Tunisian costume -- that is to say, a red cap
with a long blue silk tassel, a vest of black cloth embroidered
with gold, pantaloons of deep red, large and full gaiters of
the same color, embroidered with gold like the vest, and
yellow slippers; he had a splendid cashmere round his waist,
and a small sharp and crooked cangiar was passed through
his girdle. Although of a paleness that was almost livid, this
man had a remarkably handsome face; his eyes were
penetrating and sparkling; his nose, quite straight, and
projecting direct from the brow, was of the pure Greek type,
while his teeth, as white as pearls, were set off to admiration
by the black mustache that encircled them.
His pallor was so peculiar, that it seemed to pertain to one
who had been long entombed, and who was incapable of
resuming the healthy glow and hue of life. He was not
particularly tall, but extremely well made, and, like the men
of the south, had small hands and feet. But what astonished
Franz, who had treated Gaetano's description as a fable, was
the splendor of the apartment in which he found himself.
The entire chamber was lined with crimson brocade, worked
with flowers of gold. In a recess was a kind of divan,
surmounted with a stand of Arabian swords in silver
scabbards, and the handles resplendent with gems; from the
ceiling hung a lamp of Venetian glass, of beautiful shape and
color, while the feet rested on a Turkey carpet, in which they
sunk to the instep; tapestry hung before the door by which
Franz had entered, and also in front of another door, leading
into a second apartment which seemed to be brilliantly
illuminated. The host gave Franz time to recover from his
surprise, and, moreover, returned look for look, not even
taking his eyes off him. "Sir," he said, after a pause, "a
thousand excuses for the precaution taken in your
introduction hither; but as, during the greater portion of the
year, this island is deserted, if the secret of this abode were
discovered. I should doubtless, find on my return my
temporary retirement in a state of great disorder, which
would be exceedingly annoying, not for the loss it
occasioned me, but because I should not have the certainty I
now possess of separating myself from all the rest of
mankind at pleasure. Let me now endeavor to make you
forget this temporary unpleasantness, and offer you what no
doubt you did not expect to find here -- that is to say, a
tolerable supper and pretty comfortable beds."

such as is my hermitage, it is at your disposal; such as is my
supper, it is yours to share, if you will. Ali, is the supper
ready?" At this moment the tapestry moved aside, and a
Nubian, black as ebony, and dressed in a plain white tunic,
made a sign to his master that all was prepared in the
dining-room. "Now," said the unknown to Franz, "I do not
know if you are of my opinion, but I think nothing is more
annoying than to remain two or three hours together
without knowing by name or appellation how to address
one another. Pray observe, that I too much respect the laws
of hospitality to ask your name or title. I only request you to
give me one by which I may have the pleasure of addressing
you. As for myself, that I may put you at your ease, I tell you
that I am generally called `Sinbad the Sailor.'"
"And I," replied Franz, "will tell you, as I only require his
wonderful lamp to make me precisely like Aladdin, that I see
no reason why at this moment I should not be called
Aladdin. That will keep us from going away from the East
whither I am tempted to think I have been conveyed by
some good genius."
"Well, then, Signor Aladdin," replied the singular
amphitryon, "you heard our repast announced, will you now
take the trouble to enter the dining-room, your humble
servant going first to show the way?" At these words,
moving aside the tapestry, Sinbad preceded his guest. Franz
now looked upon another scene of enchantment; the table
was splendidly covered, and once convinced of this
important point he cast his eyes around him. The
dining-room was scarcely less striking than the room he had
just left; it was entirely of marble, with antique bas-reliefs of
priceless value; and at the four corners of this apartment,
which was oblong, were four magnificent statues, having
baskets in their hands. These baskets contained four
pyramids of most splendid fruit; there were Sicily
pine-apples, pomegranates from Malaga, oranges from the
Balearic Isles, peaches from France, and dates from Tunis.
The supper consisted of a roast pheasant garnished with
Corsican blackbirds; a boar's ham with jelly, a quarter of a
kid with tartar sauce, a glorious turbot, and a gigantic lobster.
Between these large dishes were smaller ones containing
various dainties. The dishes were of silver, and the plates of
Japanese china.
Franz rubbed his eyes in order to assure himself that this
was not a dream. Ali alone was present to wait at table, and
acquitted himself so admirably, that the guest complimented
his host thereupon. "Yes," replied he, while he did the honors
of the supper with much ease and grace -- "yes, he is a poor
devil who is much devoted to me, and does all he can to
prove it. He remembers that I saved his life, and as he has a
regard for his head, he feels some gratitude towards me for
having kept it on his shoulders." Ali approached his master,
took his hand, and kissed it.
"Would it be impertinent, Signor Sinbad," said Franz, "to ask
you the particulars of this kindness?"

"Oh, they are simple enough," replied the host. "It seems the
fellow had been caught wandering nearer to the harem of
the Bey of Tunis than etiquette permits to one of his color,
and he was condemned by the bey to have his tongue cut out,
and his hand and head cut off; the tongue the first day, the
"Ma foi, my dear sir," replied Franz, "make no apologies. I hand the second, and the head the third. I always had a
have always observed that they bandage people's eyes who desire to have a mute in my service, so learning the day his
penetrate enchanted palaces, for instance, those of Raoul in tongue was cut out, I went to the bey, and proposed to give
the `Huguenots,' and really I have nothing to complain of, him for Ali a splendid double-barreled gun which I knew he
for what I see makes me think of the wonders of the was very desirous of having. He hesitated a moment, he was
`Arabian Nights.'"
so very desirous to complete the poor devil's punishment.
"Alas, I may say with Lucullus, if I could have anticipated But when I added to the gun an English cutlass with which I
the honor of your visit, I would have prepared for it. But had shivered his highness's yataghan to pieces, the bey
116

yielded, and agreed to forgive the hand and head, but on
condition that the poor fellow never again set foot in Tunis.
This was a useless clause in the bargain, for whenever the
coward sees the first glimpse of the shores of Africa, he runs
down below, and can only be induced to appear again when
we are out of sight of that quarter of the globe."
Franz remained a moment silent and pensive, hardly
knowing what to think of the half-kindness, half-cruelty,
with which his host related the brief narrative. "And like the
celebrated sailor whose name you have assumed," he said,
by way of changing the conversation, "you pass your life in
travelling?"
"Yes. I made a vow at a time when I little thought I should
ever be able to accomplish it," said the unknown with a
singular smile; "and I made some others also which I hope I
may fulfil in due season." Although Sinbad pronounced
these words with much calmness, his eyes gave forth gleams
of extraordinary ferocity.

the hands of the statues and placed them on the table.
Between the two baskets he placed a small silver cup with a
silver cover. The care with which Ali placed this cup on the
table roused Franz's curiosity. He raised the cover and saw a
kind of greenish paste, something like preserved angelica,
but which was perfectly unknown to him. He replaced the
lid, as ignorant of what the cup contained as he was before
he had looked at it, and then casting his eyes towards his
host he saw him smile at his disappointment. "You cannot
guess," said he, "what there is in that small vase, can you?"
"No, I really cannot."
"Well, then, that green preserve is nothing less than the
ambrosia which Hebe served at the table of Jupiter."
"But," replied Franz, "this ambrosia, no doubt, in passing
through mortal hands has lost its heavenly appellation and
assumed a human name; in vulgar phrase, what may you
term this composition, for which, to tell the truth, I do not
feel any particular desire?"

"You have suffered a great deal, sir?" said Franz inquiringly.

"Ah, thus it is that our material origin is revealed," cried
Sinbad; "we frequently pass so near to happiness without
seeing, without regarding it, or if we do see and regard it,
yet without recognizing it. Are you a man for the
"Everything," answered Franz, -- "your voice, your look,
substantials, and is gold your god? Taste this, and the mines
your pallid complexion, and even the life you lead."
of Peru, Guzerat, and Golconda are opened to you. Are you
"I? -- I live the happiest life possible, the real life of a pasha. I a man of imagination -- a poet? Taste this, and the
am king of all creation. I am pleased with one place, and stay boundaries of possibility disappear; the fields of infinite
there; I get tired of it, and leave it; I am free as a bird and space open to you, you advance free in heart, free in mind,
have wings like one; my attendants obey my slightest wish. into the boundless realms of unfettered revery. Are you
Sometimes I amuse myself by delivering some bandit or ambitious, and do you seek after the greatnesses of the earth?
criminal from the bonds of the law. Then I have my mode of Taste this, and in an hour you will be a king, not a king of a
dispensing justice, silent and sure, without respite or appeal, petty kingdom hidden in some corner of Europe like France,
which condemns or pardons, and which no one sees. Ah, if Spain, or England, but king of the world, king of the
you had tasted my life, you would not desire any other, and universe, king of creation; without bowing at the feet of
would never return to the world unless you had some great Satan, you will be king and master of all the kingdoms of the
project to accomplish there."
earth. Is it not tempting what I offer you, and is it not an easy
thing, since it is only to do thus? Look!" At these words he
"Revenge, for instance!" observed Franz.
uncovered the small cup which contained the substance so
The unknown fixed on the young man one of those looks lauded, took a teaspoonful of the magic sweetmeat, raised it
which penetrate into the depth of the heart and thoughts. to his lips, and swallowed it slowly with his eyes half shut
"And why revenge?" he asked.
and his head bent backwards. Franz did not disturb him
"Because," replied Franz, "you seem to me like a man who, whilst he absorbed his favorite sweetmeat, but when he had
persecuted by society, has a fearful account to settle with it." finished, he inquired, -- "What, then, is this precious stuff?"
Sinbad started and looked fixedly at him, as he replied,
"What makes you suppose so?"

"Ah," responded Sinbad, laughing with his singular laugh
which displayed his white and sharp teeth. "You have not
guessed rightly. Such as you see me I am, a sort of
philosopher, and one day perhaps I shall go to Paris to rival
Monsieur Appert, and the little man in the blue cloak."

"Did you ever hear," he replied, "of the Old Man of the
Mountain, who attempted to assassinate Philip Augustus?"
"Of course I have."

"Well, you know he reigned over a rich valley which was
overhung by the mountain whence he derived his
"And will that be the first time you ever took that journey?"
picturesque name. In this valley were magnificent gardens
"Yes; it will. I must seem to you by no means curious, but I planted by Hassen-ben-Sabah, and in these gardens isolated
assure you that it is not my fault I have delayed it so long -- pavilions. Into these pavilions he admitted the elect, and
there, says Marco Polo, gave them to eat a certain herb,
it will happen one day or the other."
which transported them to Paradise, in the midst of
"And do you propose to make this journey very shortly?"
ever-blooming shrubs, ever-ripe fruit, and ever-lovely
"I do not know; it depends on circumstances which depend virgins. What these happy persons took for reality was but a
on certain arrangements."
dream; but it was a dream so soft, so voluptuous, so
"I should like to be there at the time you come, and I will enthralling, that they sold themselves body and soul to him
endeavor to repay you, as far as lies in my power, for your who gave it to them, and obedient to his orders as to those of
a deity, struck down the designated victim, died in torture
liberal hospitality displayed to me at Monte Cristo."
without a murmur, believing that the death they underwent
"I should avail myself of your offer with pleasure," replied was but a quick transition to that life of delights of which the
the host, "but, unfortunately, if I go there, it will be, in all holy herb, now before you had given them a slight foretaste."
probability, incognito."
"Then," cried Franz, "it is hashish! I know that -- by name at
The supper appeared to have been supplied solely for Franz, least."
for the unknown scarcely touched one or two dishes of the
splendid banquet to which his guest did ample justice. Then "That is it precisely, Signor Aladdin; it is hashish -- the
Ali brought on the dessert, or rather took the baskets from purest and most unadulterated hashish of Alexandria, -- the
hashish of Abou-Gor, the celebrated maker, the only man,
117


CHAPTER 31


ITALY: SINBAD THE SAILOR

the man to whom there should be built a palace, inscribed
with these words, `A grateful world to the dealer in
happiness.'"

As you please; it is ready in all ways."
"I will take it in the Turkish style," replied Franz.

"And you are right," said his host; "it shows you have a
tendency for an Oriental life. Ah, those Orientals; they are
the only men who know how to live. As for me," he added,
with one of those singular smiles which did not escape the
"Judge for yourself, Signor Aladdin -- judge, but do not young man, "when I have completed my affairs in Paris, I
confine yourself to one trial. Like everything else, we must shall go and die in the East; and should you wish to see me
habituate the senses to a fresh impression, gentle or violent, again, you must seek me at Cairo, Bagdad, or Ispahan."
sad or joyous. There is a struggle in nature against this
"Ma foi," said Franz, "it would be the easiest thing in the
divine substance, -- in nature which is not made for joy and
world; for I feel eagle's wings springing out at my shoulders,
clings to pain. Nature subdued must yield in the combat, the
and with those wings I could make a tour of the world in
dream must succeed to reality, and then the dream reigns
four and twenty hours."
supreme, then the dream becomes life, and life becomes the
dream. But what changes occur! It is only by comparing the "Ah, yes, the hashish is beginning its work. Well, unfurl your
pains of actual being with the joys of the assumed existence, wings, and fly into superhuman regions; fear nothing, there
that you would desire to live no longer, but to dream thus is a watch over you; and if your wings, like those of Icarus,
forever. When you return to this mundane sphere from your melt before the sun, we are here to ease your fall." He then
visionary world, you would seem to leave a Neapolitan said something in Arabic to Ali, who made a sign of
spring for a Lapland winter -- to quit paradise for earth -- obedience and withdrew, but not to any distance. As to
heaven for hell! Taste the hashish, guest of mine -- taste the Franz a strange transformation had taken place in him. All
the bodily fatigue of the day, all the preoccupation of mind
hashish."
which the events of the evening had brought on,
Franz's only reply was to take a teaspoonful of the
disappeared as they do at the first approach of sleep, when
marvellous preparation, about as much in quantity as his
we are still sufficiently conscious to be aware of the coming
host had eaten, and lift it to his mouth. "Diable!" he said,
of slumber. His body seemed to acquire an airy lightness, his
after having swallowed the divine preserve. "I do not know
perception brightened in a remarkable manner, his senses
if the result will be as agreeable as you describe, but the
seemed to redouble their power, the horizon continued to
thing does not appear to me as palatable as you say."
expand; but it was not the gloomy horizon of vague alarms,
"Because your palate has not yet been attuned to the and which he had seen before he slept, but a blue,
sublimity of the substances it flavors. Tell me, the first time transparent, unbounded horizon, with all the blue of the
you tasted oysters, tea, porter, truffles, and sundry other ocean, all the spangles of the sun, all the perfumes of the
dainties which you now adore, did you like them? Could summer breeze; then, in the midst of the songs of his sailors,
you comprehend how the Romans stuffed their pheasants -- songs so clear and sonorous, that they would have made a
with assafoetida, and the Chinese eat swallows' nests? Eh? divine harmony had their notes been taken down, -- he saw
no! Well, it is the same with hashish; only eat for a week, and the Island of Monte Cristo, no longer as a threatening rock in
nothing in the world will seem to you to equal the delicacy the midst of the waves, but as an oasis in the desert; then, as
of its flavor, which now appears to you flat and distasteful. his boat drew nearer, the songs became louder, for an
Let us now go into the adjoining chamber, which is your enchanting and mysterious harmony rose to heaven, as if
apartment, and Ali will bring us coffee and pipes." They some Loreley had decreed to attract a soul thither, or
both arose, and while he who called himself Sinbad -- and Amphion, the enchanter, intended there to build a city.
whom we have occasionally named so, that we might, like
At length the boat touched the shore, but without effort,
his guest, have some title by which to distinguish him -without shock, as lips touch lips; and he entered the grotto
gave some orders to the servant, Franz entered still another
amidst continued strains of most delicious melody. He
apartment. It was simply yet richly furnished. It was round,
descended, or rather seemed to descend, several steps,
and a large divan completely encircled it. Divan, walls,
inhaling the fresh and balmy air, like that which may be
ceiling, floor, were all covered with magnificent skins as soft
supposed to reign around the grotto of Circe, formed from
and downy as the richest carpets; there were heavy-maned
such perfumes as set the mind a dreaming, and such fires as
lion-skins from Atlas, striped tiger-skins from Bengal;
burn the very senses; and he saw again all he had seen
panther-skins from the Cape, spotted beautifully, like those
before his sleep, from Sinbad, his singular host, to Ali, the
that appeared to Dante; bear-skins from Siberia, fox-skins
mute attendant; then all seemed to fade away and become
from Norway, and so on; and all these skins were strewn in
confused before his eyes, like the last shadows of the magic
profusion one on the other, so that it seemed like walking
lantern before it is extinguished, and he was again in the
over the most mossy turf, or reclining on the most luxurious
chamber of statues, lighted only by one of those pale and
bed. Both laid themselves down on the divan; chibouques
antique lamps which watch in the dead of the night over the
with jasmine tubes and amber mouthpieces were within
sleep of pleasure. They were the same statues, rich in form,
reach, and all prepared so that there was no need to smoke
in attraction, and poesy, with eyes of fascination, smiles of
the same pipe twice. Each of them took one, which Ali
love, and bright and flowing hair. They were Phryne,
lighted and then retired to prepare the coffee. There was a
Cleopatra, Messalina, those three celebrated courtesans.
moment's silence, during which Sinbad gave himself up to
Then among them glided like a pure ray, like a Christian
thoughts that seemed to occupy him incessantly, even in the
angel in the midst of Olympus, one of those chaste figures,
midst of his conversation; and Franz abandoned himself to
those calm shadows, those soft visions, which seemed to veil
that mute revery, into which we always sink when smoking
its virgin brow before these marble wantons. Then the three
excellent tobacco, which seems to remove with its fume all
statues advanced towards him with looks of love, and
the troubles of the mind, and to give the smoker in exchange
approached the couch on which he was reposing, their feet
all the visions of the soul. Ali brought in the coffee. "How do
hidden in their long white tunics, their throats bare, hair
you take it?" inquired the unknown; "in the French or
flowing like waves, and assuming attitudes which the gods
Turkish style, strong or weak, sugar or none, cool or boiling?
could not resist, but which saints withstood, and looks
"Do you know," said Franz, "I have a very great inclination
to judge for myself of the truth or exaggeration of your
eulogies."

118

inflexible and ardent like those with which the serpent
charms the bird; and then he gave way before looks that held
him in a torturing grasp and delighted his senses as with a
voluptuous kiss. It seemed to Franz that he closed his eyes,
and in a last look about him saw the vision of modesty
completely veiled; and then followed a dream of passion like
that promised by the Prophet to the elect. Lips of stone
turned to flame, breasts of ice became like heated lava, so
that to Franz, yielding for the first time to the sway of the

drug, love was a sorrow and voluptuousness a torture, as
burning mouths were pressed to his thirsty lips, and he was
held in cool serpent-like embraces. The more he strove
against this unhallowed passion the more his senses yielded
to its thrall, and at length, weary of a struggle that taxed his
very soul, he gave way and sank back breathless and
exhausted beneath the kisses of these marble goddesses, and
the enchantment of his marvellous dream.

119


CHAPTER 32


Chapter 32

W

hen Franz returned to himself, he seemed still to be in
a dream. He thought himself in a sepulchre, into
which a ray of sunlight in pity scarcely penetrated. He
stretched forth his hand, and touched stone; he rose to his
seat, and found himself lying on his bournous in a bed of dry
heather, very soft and odoriferous. The vision had fled; and
as if the statues had been but shadows from the tomb, they
had vanished at his waking. He advanced several paces
towards the point whence the light came, and to all the
excitement of his dream succeeded the calmness of reality.
He found that he was in a grotto, went towards the opening,
and through a kind of fanlight saw a blue sea and an azure
sky. The air and water were shining in the beams of the
morning sun; on the shore the sailors were sitting, chatting
and laughing; and at ten yards from them the boat was at
anchor, undulating gracefully on the water. There for some
time he enjoyed the fresh breeze which played on his brow,
and listened to the dash of the waves on the beach, that left
against the rocks a lace of foam as white as silver. He was for
some time without reflection or thought for the divine charm
which is in the things of nature, specially after a fantastic
dream; then gradually this view of the outer world, so calm,
so pure, so grand, reminded him of the illusiveness of his
vision, and once more awakened memory. He recalled his
arrival on the island, his presentation to a smuggler chief, a
subterranean palace full of splendor, an excellent supper,
and a spoonful of hashish. It seemed, however, even in the
very face of open day, that at least a year had elapsed since
all these things had passed, so deep was the impression
made in his mind by the dream, and so strong a hold had it
taken of his imagination. Thus every now and then he saw in
fancy amid the sailors, seated on a rock, or undulating in the
vessel, one of the shadows which had shared his dream with
looks and kisses. Otherwise, his head was perfectly clear,
and his body refreshed; he was free from the slightest
headache; on the contrary, he felt a certain degree of
lightness, a faculty for absorbing the pure air, and enjoying
the bright sunshine more vividly than ever.
He went gayly up to the sailors, who rose as soon as they
perceived him; and the patron, accosting him, said, "The
Signor Sinbad has left his compliments for your excellency,
and desires us to express the regret he feels at not being able
to take his leave in person; but he trusts you will excuse him,
as very important business calls him to Malaga."
"So, then, Gaetano," said Franz, "this is, then, all reality; there
exists a man who has received me in this island, entertained
me right royally, and has departed while I was asleep?"
"He exists as certainly as that you may see his small yacht
with all her sails spread; and if you will use your glass, you
will, in all probability, recognize your host in the midst of his
crew." So saying, Gaetano pointed in a direction in which a
small vessel was making sail towards the southern point of
Corsica. Franz adjusted his telescope, and directed it
towards the yacht. Gaetano was not mistaken. At the stern
the mysterious stranger was standing up looking towards
the shore, and holding a spy-glass in his hand. He was
attired as he had been on the previous evening, and waved
his pocket-handkerchief to his guest in token of adieu. Franz
returned the salute by shaking his handkerchief as an
exchange of signals. After a second, a slight cloud of smoke
was seen at the stern of the vessel, which rose gracefully as it
expanded in the air, and then Franz heard a slight report.
120

THE WAKING

The Waking
"There, do you hear?" observed Gaetano; "he is bidding you
adieu." The young man took his carbine and fired it in the air,
but without any idea that the noise could be heard at the
distance which separated the yacht from the shore.
"What are your excellency's orders?" inquired Gaetano.
"In the first place, light me a torch."
"Ah, yes, I understand," replied the patron, "to find the
entrance to the enchanted apartment. With much pleasure,
your excellency, if it would amuse you; and I will get you
the torch you ask for. But I too have had the idea you have,
and two or three times the same fancy has come over me; but
I have always given it up. Giovanni, light a torch," he added,
"and give it to his excellency."
Giovanni obeyed. Franz took the lamp, and entered the
subterranean grotto, followed by Gaetano. He recognized
the place where he had awaked by the bed of heather that
was there; but it was in vain that he carried his torch all
round the exterior surface of the grotto. He saw nothing,
unless that, by traces of smoke, others had before him
attempted the same thing, and, like him, in vain. Yet he did
not leave a foot of this granite wall, as impenetrable as
futurity, without strict scrutiny; he did not see a fissure
without introducing the blade of his hunting sword into it,
or a projecting point on which he did not lean and press in
the hopes it would give way. All was vain; and he lost two
hours in his attempts, which were at last utterly useless. At
the end of this time he gave up his search, and Gaetano
smiled.
When Franz appeared again on the shore, the yacht only
seemed like a small white speck on the horizon. He looked
again through his glass, but even then he could not
distinguish anything. Gaetano reminded him that he had
come for the purpose of shooting goats, which he had utterly
forgotten. He took his fowling-piece, and began to hunt over
the island with the air of a man who is fulfilling a duty,
rather than enjoying a pleasure; and at the end of a quarter
of an hour he had killed a goat and two kids. These animals,
though wild and agile as chamois, were too much like
domestic goats, and Franz could not consider them as game.
Moreover, other ideas, much more enthralling, occupied his
mind. Since, the evening before, he had really been the hero
of one of the tales of the "Thousand and One Nights," and he
was irresistibly attracted towards the grotto. Then, in spite of
the failure of his first search, he began a second, after having
told Gaetano to roast one of the two kids. The second visit
was a long one, and when he returned the kid was roasted
and the repast ready. Franz was sitting on the spot where he
was on the previous evening when his mysterious host had
invited him to supper; and he saw the little yacht, now like a
sea-gull on the wave, continuing her flight towards Corsica.
"Why," he remarked to Gaetano, "you told me that Signor
Sinbad was going to Malaga, while it seems he is in the
direction of Porto-Vecchio."
"Don't you remember," said the patron, "I told you that
among the crew there were two Corsican brigands?"
"True; and he is going to land them," added Franz.
"Precisely so," replied Gaetano. "Ah, he is one who fears
neither God nor Satan, they say, and would at any time run
fifty leagues out of his course to do a poor devil a service."

"But such services as these might involve him with the about to lead him to Albert, when Morcerf himself appeared.
authorities of the country in which he practices this kind of
The apartment consisted of two small rooms and a parlor.
philanthropy," said Franz.
The two rooms looked onto the street -- a fact which Signor
"And what cares he for that," replied Gaetano with a laugh, Pastrini commented upon as an inappreciable advantage.
"or any authorities? He smiles at them. Let them try to The rest of the floor was hired by a very rich gentleman who
pursue him! Why, in the first place, his yacht is not a ship, was supposed to be a Sicilian or Maltese; but the host was
but a bird, and he would beat any frigate three knots in unable to decide to which of the two nations the traveller
every nine; and if he were to throw himself on the coast, why, belonged. "Very good, signor Pastrini," said Franz; "but we
is he not certain of finding friends everywhere?"
must have some supper instantly, and a carriage for
tomorrow and the following days."
It was perfectly clear that the Signor Sinbad, Franz's host,
had the honor of being on excellent terms with the "As to supper," replied the landlord, "you shall be served
smugglers and bandits along the whole coast of the immediately; but as for the carriage" -Mediterranean, and so enjoyed exceptional privileges. As to
"What as to the carriage?" exclaimed Albert. "Come, come,
Franz, he had no longer any inducement to remain at Monte
Signor Pastrini, no joking; we must have a carriage."
Cristo. He had lost all hope of detecting the secret of the
grotto; he consequently despatched his breakfast, and, his "Sir," replied the host, "we will do all in our power to
boat being ready, he hastened on board, and they were soon procure you one -- this is all I can say."
under way. At the moment the boat began her course they "And when shall we know?" inquired Franz.
lost sight of the yacht, as it disappeared in the gulf of
Porto-Vecchio. With it was effaced the last trace of the "To-morrow morning," answered the inn-keeper.
preceding night; and then supper, Sinbad, hashish, statues, -- "Oh, the deuce! Then we shall pay the more, that's all, I see
all became a dream for Franz. The boat sailed on all day and plainly enough. At Drake's or Aaron's one pays twenty-five
all night, and next morning, when the sun rose, they had lost lire for common days, and thirty or thirty-five lire a day
sight of Monte Cristo. When Franz had once again set foot more for Sundays and feast days; add five lire a day more
on shore, he forgot, for the moment at least, the events which for extras, that will make forty, and there's an end of it."
had just passed, while he finished his affairs of pleasure at
"I am afraid if we offer them double that we shall not
Florence, and then thought of nothing but how he should
procure a carriage."
rejoin his companion, who was awaiting him at Rome.
"Then they must put horses to mine. It is a little worse for the
He set out, and on the Saturday evening reached the Eternal
journey, but that's no matter."
City by the mail-coach. An apartment, as we have said, had
been retained beforehand, and thus he had but to go to "There are no horses." Albert looked at Franz like a man who
Signor Pastrini's hotel. But this was not so easy a matter, for hears a reply he does not understand.
the streets were thronged with people, and Rome was "Do you understand that, my dear Franz -- no horses?" he
already a prey to that low and feverish murmur which said, "but can't we have post-horses?"
precedes all great events; and at Rome there are four great
events in every year, -- the Carnival, Holy Week, Corpus "They have been all hired this fortnight, and there are none
Christi, and the Feast of St. Peter. All the rest of the year the left but those absolutely requisite for posting."
city is in that state of dull apathy, between life and death, "What are we to say to this?" asked Franz.
which renders it similar to a kind of station between this
"I say, that when a thing completely surpasses my
world and the next -- a sublime spot, a resting-place full of
comprehension, I am accustomed not to dwell on that thing,
poetry and character, and at which Franz had already halted
but to pass to another. Is supper ready, Signor Pastrini?"
five or six times, and at each time found it more marvellous
and striking. At last he made his way through the mob, "Yes, your excellency."
which was continually increasing and getting more and
"Well, then, let us sup."
more turbulent, and reached the hotel. On his first inquiry he
was told, with the impertinence peculiar to hired "But the carriage and horses?" said Franz.
hackney-coachmen and inn-keepers with their houses full, "Be easy, my dear boy; they will come in due season; it is
that there was no room for him at the Hotel de Londres. only a question of how much shall be charged for them."
Then he sent his card to Signor Pastrini, and asked for Albert Morcerf then, with that delighted philosophy which believes
de Morcerf. This plan succeeded; and Signor Pastrini himself that nothing is impossible to a full purse or well-lined
ran to him, excusing himself for having made his excellency pocketbook, supped, went to bed, slept soundly, and
wait, scolding the waiters, taking the candlestick from the dreamed he was racing all over Rome at Carnival time in a
porter, who was ready to pounce on the traveller and was coach with six horses.

121


CHAPTER 33


Chapter 33

ROMAN BANDITS

Roman Bandits

T

he next morning Franz woke first, and instantly rang the
bell. The sound had not yet died away when Signor
Pastrini himself entered.
"Well, excellency," said the landlord triumphantly, and
without waiting for Franz to question him, "I feared
yesterday, when I would not promise you anything, that you
were too late -- there is not a single carriage to be had -- that
is, for the last three days of the carnival."
"Yes," returned Franz, "for the very three days it is most
needed."

tomorrow, and the day after, and then you will make a good
profit."
"But, excellency" -- said Pastrini, still striving to gain his
point.
"Now go," returned Franz, "or I shall go myself and bargain
with your affettatore, who is mine also; he is an old friend of
mine, who has plundered me pretty well already, and, in the
hope of making more out of me, he will take a less price than
the one I offer you; you will lose the preference, and that will
be your fault."

"What is the matter?" said Albert, entering; "no carriage to be "Do not give yourselves the trouble, excellency," returned
had?"
Signor Pastrini, with the smile peculiar to the Italian
speculator when he confesses defeat; "I will do all I can, and
"Just so," returned Franz, "you have guessed it."
I hope you will be satisfied."
"Well, your Eternal City is a nice sort of place."
"And now we understand each other."
"That is to say, excellency," replied Pastrini, who was
"When do you wish the carriage to be here?"
desirous of keeping up the dignity of the capital of the
Christian world in the eyes of his guest, "that there are no "In an hour."
carriages to be had from Sunday to Tuesday evening, but
"In an hour it will be at the door."
from now till Sunday you can have fifty if you please."
An hour after the vehicle was at the door; it was a hack
"Ah, that is something," said Albert; "to-day is Thursday, and
conveyance which was elevated to the rank of a private
who knows what may arrive between this and Sunday?"
carriage in honor of the occasion, but, in spite of its humble
"Ten or twelve thousand travellers will arrive," replied Franz, exterior, the young men would have thought themselves
"which will make it still more difficult."
happy to have secured it for the last three days of the
Carnival. "Excellency," cried the cicerone, seeing Franz
"My friend," said Morcerf, "let us enjoy the present without
approach the window, "shall I bring the carriage nearer to
gloomy forebodings for the future."
the palace?"
"At least we can have a window?"
Accustomed as Franz was to the Italian phraseology, his first
"Where?"
impulse was to look round him, but these words were
addressed to him. Franz was the "excellency," the vehicle
"In the Corso."
was the "carriage," and the Hotel de Londres was the
"Ah, a window!" exclaimed Signor Pastrini, -- "utterly "palace." The genius for laudation characteristic of the race
impossible; there was only one left on the fifth floor of the was in that phrase.
Doria Palace, and that has been let to a Russian prince for
Franz and Albert descended, the carriage approached the
twenty sequins a day."
palace; their excellencies stretched their legs along the seats;
The two young men looked at each other with an air of the cicerone sprang into the seat behind. "Where do your
stupefaction.
excellencics wish to go?" asked he.
"Well," said Franz to Albert, "do you know what is the best "To Saint Peter's first, and then to the Colosseum," returned
thing we can do? It is to pass the Carnival at Venice; there Albert. But Albert did not know that it takes a day to see
we are sure of obtaining gondolas if we cannot have Saint Peter's, and a month to study it. The day was passed at
carriages."
Saint Peter's alone. Suddenly the daylight began to fade
"Ah, the devil, no," cried Albert; "I came to Rome to see the away; Franz took out his watch -- it was half-past four. They
returned to the hotel; at the door Franz ordered the
Carnival, and I will, though I see it on stilts."
coachman to be ready at eight. He wished to show Albert the
"Bravo! an excellent idea. We will disguise ourselves as
Colosseum by moonlight, as he had shown him Saint Peter's
monster pulchinellos or shepherds of the Landes, and we
by daylight. When we show a friend a city one has already
shall have complete success."
visited, we feel the same pride as when we point out a
"Do your excellencies still wish for a carriage from now to woman whose lover we have been. He was to leave the city
Sunday morning?"
by the Porta del Popolo, skirt the outer wall, and re-enter by
"Parbleu!" said Albert, "do you think we are going to run the Porta San Giovanni; thus they would behold the
Colosseum without finding their impressions dulled by first
about on foot in the streets of Rome, like lawyer's clerks?"
looking on the Capitol, the Forum, the Arch of Septimus
"I hasten to comply with your excellencies' wishes; only, I Severus, the Temple of Antoninus and Faustina, and the Via
tell you beforehand, the carriage will cost you six piastres a Sacra. They sat down to dinner. Signor Pastrini had
day."
promised them a banquet; he gave them a tolerable repast.
"And, as I am not a millionaire, like the gentleman in the At the end of the dinner he entered in person. Franz thought
next apartments," said Franz, "I warn you, that as I have that he came to hear his dinner praised, and began
been four times before at Rome, I know the prices of all the accordingly, but at the first words he was interrupted.
carriages; we will give you twelve piastres for to-day, "Excellency," said Pastrini, "I am delighted to have your
122

approbation, but it was not for that I came."
"Did you come to tell us you have procured a carriage?"
asked Albert, lighting his cigar.

upon me as a liar, it is useless for me to say anything; it was
for your interest I" --

"Albert does not say you are a liar, Signor Pastrini," said
Franz, "but that he will not believe what you are going to tell
"No; and your excellencies will do well not to think of that
us, -- but I will believe all you say; so proceed."
any longer; at Rome things can or cannot be done; when you
are told anything cannot be done, there is an end of it."
"But if your excellency doubt my veracity" -"It is much more convenient at Paris, -- when anything "Signor Pastrini," returned Franz, "you are more susceptible
cannot be done, you pay double, and it is done directly."
than Cassandra, who was a prophetess, and yet no one
believed her; while you, at least, are sure of the credence of
"That is what all the French say," returned Signor Pastrini,
half your audience. Come, sit down, and tell us all about this
somewhat piqued; "for that reason, I do not understand why
Signor Vampa."
they travel."
"But," said Albert, emitting a volume of smoke and balancing
his chair on its hind legs, "only madmen, or blockheads like
us, ever do travel. Men in their senses do not quit their hotel
in the Rue du Helder, their walk on the Boulevard de Gand,
and the Cafe de Paris." It is of course understood that Albert
resided in the aforesaid street, appeared every day on the
fashionable walk, and dined frequently at the only
restaurant where you can really dine, that is, if you are on
good terms with its frequenters. Signor Pastrini remained
silent a short time; it was evident that he was musing over
this answer, which did not seem very clear. "But," said Franz,
in his turn interrupting his host's meditations, "you had
some motive for coming here, may I beg to know what it
was?"
"Ah, yes; you have ordered your carriage at eight o'clock
precisely?"
"I have."
"You intend visiting Il Colosseo."
"You mean the Colosseum?"
"It is the same thing. You have told your coachman to leave
the city by the Porta del Popolo, to drive round the walls,
and re-enter by the Porta San Giovanni?"
"These are my words exactly."
"Well, this route is impossible."
"Impossible!"
"Very dangerous, to say the least."
"Dangerous! -- and why?"
"On account of the famous Luigi Vampa."
"Pray, who may this famous Luigi Vampa be?" inquired
Albert; "he may be very famous at Rome, but I can assure
you he is quite unknown at Paris."
"What! do you not know him?"
"I have not that honor."

"I had told your excellency he is the most famous bandit we
have had since the days of Mastrilla."
"Well, what has this bandit to do with the order I have given
the coachman to leave the city by the Porta del Popolo, and
to re-enter by the Porta San Giovanni?"
"This," replied Signor Pastrini, "that you will go out by one,
but I very much doubt your returning by the other."
"Why?" asked Franz.
"Because, after nightfall, you are not safe fifty yards from the
gates."
"On your honor is that true?" cried Albert.
"Count," returned Signor Pastrini, hurt at Albert's repeated
doubts of the truth of his assertions, "I do not say this to you,
but to your companion, who knows Rome, and knows, too,
that these things are not to be laughed at."
"My dear fellow," said Albert, turning to Franz, "here is an
admirable adventure; we will fill our carriage with pistols,
blunderbusses, and double-barrelled guns. Luigi Vampa
comes to take us, and we take him -- we bring him back to
Rome, and present him to his holiness the Pope, who asks
how he can repay so great a service; then we merely ask for a
carriage and a pair of horses, and we see the Carnival in the
carriage, and doubtless the Roman people will crown us at
the Capitol, and proclaim us, like Curtius and the veiled
Horatius, the preservers of their country." Whilst Albert
proposed this scheme, Signor Pastrini's face assumed an
expression impossible to describe.
"And pray," asked Franz, "where are these pistols,
blunderbusses, and other deadly weapons with which you
intend filling the carriage?"
"Not out of my armory, for at Terracina I was plundered
even of my hunting-knife."
"I shared the same fate at Aquapendente."

"Do you know, Signor Pastrini," said Albert, lighting a
second cigar at the first, "that this practice is very convenient
for bandits, and that it seems to be due to an arrangement of
"Never."
their own." Doubtless Signor Pastrini found this pleasantry
"Well, then, he is a bandit, compared to whom the Decesaris
compromising, for he only answered half the question, and
and the Gasparones were mere children."
then he spoke to Franz, as the only one likely to listen with
"Now then, Albert," cried Franz, "here is a bandit for you at attention. "Your excellency knows that it is not customary to
last."
defend yourself when attacked by bandits."
"You have never heard his name?"

"I forewarn you, Signor Pastrini, that I shall not believe one
word of what you are going to tell us; having told you this,
begin."
"Once upon a time" -"Well, go on." Signor Pastrini turned toward Franz, who
seemed to him the more reasonable of the two; we must do
him justice, -- he had had a great many Frenchmen in his
house, but had never been able to comprehend them.
"Excellency," said he gravely, addressing Franz, "if you look

"What!" cried Albert, whose courage revolted at the idea of
being plundered tamely, "not make any resistance!"
"No, for it would be useless. What could you do against a
dozen bandits who spring out of some pit, ruin, or aqueduct,
and level their pieces at you?"
"Eh, parbleu! -- they should kill me."
The inn-keeper turned to Franz with an air that seemed to
say, "Your friend is decidedly mad."
123


CHAPTER 33


ROMAN BANDITS

"My dear Albert," returned Franz, "your answer is sublime,
and worthy the `Let him die,' of Corneille, only, when
Horace made that answer, the safety of Rome was concerned;
but, as for us, it is only to gratify a whim, and it would be
ridiculous to risk our lives for so foolish a motive." Albert
poured himself out a glass of lacryma Christi, which he
sipped at intervals, muttering some unintelligible words.
"Well, Signor Pastrini," said Franz, "now that my companion
is quieted, and you have seen how peaceful my intentions
are, tell me who is this Luigi Vampa. Is he a shepherd or a
nobleman? -- young or old? -- tall or short? Describe him, in
order that, if we meet him by chance, like Bugaboo John or
Lara, we may recognize him."
"You could not apply to any one better able to inform you on
all these points, for I knew him when he was a child, and one
day that I fell into his hands, going from Ferentino to Alatri,
he, fortunately for me, recollected me, and set me free, not
only without ransom, but made me a present of a very
splendid watch, and related his history to me."
"Let us see the watch," said Albert.
Signor Pastrini drew from his fob a magnificent Breguet,
bearing the name of its maker, of Parisian manufacture, and
a count's coronet.
"Here it is," said he.
"Peste," returned Albert, "I compliment you on it; I have its
fellow" -- he took his watch from his waistcoat pocket -- "and
it cost me 3,000 francs."
"Let us hear the history," said Franz, motioning Signor
Pastrini to seat himself.
"Your excellencies permit it?" asked the host.
"Pardieu!" cried Albert, "you are not a preacher, to remain
standing!"
The host sat down, after having made each of them a
respectful bow, which meant that he was ready to tell them
all they wished to know concerning Luigi Vampa. "You tell
me," said Franz, at the moment Signor Pastrini was about to
open his mouth, "that you knew Luigi Vampa when he was
a child -- he is still a young man, then?"
"A young man? he is only two and twenty; -- he will gain
himself a reputation."
"What do you think of that, Albert? -- at two and twenty to
be thus famous?"
"Yes, and at his age, Alexander, Caesar, and Napoleon, who
have all made some noise in the world, were quite behind
him."
"So," continued Franz, "the hero of this history is only two
and twenty?"
"Scarcely so much."
"Is he tall or short?"
"Of the middle height -- about the same stature as his
excellency," returned the host, pointing to Albert.
"Thanks for the comparison," said Albert, with a bow.
"Go on, Signor Pastrini," continued Franz, smiling at his
friend's susceptibility. "To what class of society does he
belong?"
"He was a shepherd-boy attached to the farm of the Count of
San-Felice, situated between Palestrina and the lake of Gabri;
he was born at Pampinara, and entered the count's service
when he was five years old; his father was also a shepherd,
who owned a small flock, and lived by the wool and the
milk, which he sold at Rome. When quite a child, the little
124

Vampa displayed a most extraordinary precocity. One day,
when he was seven years old, he came to the curate of
Palestrina, and asked to be taught to read; it was somewhat
difficult, for he could not quit his flock; but the good curate
went every day to say mass at a little hamlet too poor to pay
a priest and which, having no other name, was called Borgo;
he told Luigi that he might meet him on his return, and that
then he would give him a lesson, warning him that it would
be short, and that he must profit as much as possible by it.
The child accepted joyfully. Every day Luigi led his flock to
graze on the road that leads from Palestrina to Borgo; every
day, at nine o'clock in the morning, the priest and the boy sat
down on a bank by the wayside, and the little shepherd took
his lesson out of the priest's breviary. At the end of three
months he had learned to read. This was not enough -- he
must now learn to write. The priest had a writing teacher at
Rome make three alphabets -- one large, one middling, and
one small; and pointed out to him that by the help of a sharp
instrument he could trace the letters on a slate, and thus
learn to write. The same evening, when the flock was safe at
the farm, the little Luigi hastened to the smith at Palestrina,
took a large nail, heated and sharpened it, and formed a sort
of stylus. The next morning he gathered an armful of pieces
of slate and began. At the end of three months he had
learned to write. The curate, astonished at his quickness and
intelligence, made him a present of pens, paper, and a
penknife. This demanded new effort, but nothing compared
to the first; at the end of a week he wrote as well with this
pen as with the stylus. The curate related the incident to the
Count of San-Felice, who sent for the little shepherd, made
him read and write before him, ordered his attendant to let
him eat with the domestics, and to give him two piastres a
month. With this, Luigi purchased books and pencils. He
applied his imitative powers to everything, and, like Giotto,
when young, he drew on his slate sheep, houses, and trees.
Then, with his knife, he began to carve all sorts of objects in
wood; it was thus that Pinelli, the famous sculptor, had
commenced.
"A girl of six or seven -- that is, a little younger than Vampa
-- tended sheep on a farm near Palestrina; she was an orphan,
born at Valmontone and was named Teresa. The two
children met, sat down near each other, let their flocks
mingle together, played, laughed, and conversed together; in
the evening they separated the Count of San-Felice's flock
from those of Baron Cervetri, and the children returned to
their respective farms, promising to meet the next morning.
The next day they kept their word, and thus they grew up
together. Vampa was twelve, and Teresa eleven. And yet
their natural disposition revealed itself. Beside his taste for
the fine arts, which Luigi had carried as far as he could in his
solitude, he was given to alternating fits of sadness and
enthusiasm, was often angry and capricious, and always
sarcastic. None of the lads of Pampinara, Palestrina, or
Valmontone had been able to gain any influence over him or
even to become his companion. His disposition (always
inclined to exact concessions rather than to make them) kept
him aloof from all friendships. Teresa alone ruled by a look,
a word, a gesture, this impetuous character, which yielded
beneath the hand of a woman, and which beneath the hand
of a man might have broken, but could never have been
bended. Teresa was lively and gay, but coquettish to excess.
The two piastres that Luigi received every month from the
Count of San-Felice's steward, and the price of all the little
carvings in wood he sold at Rome, were expended in
ear-rings, necklaces, and gold hairpins. So that, thanks to her
friend's generosity, Teresa was the most beautiful and the
best-attired peasant near Rome. The two children grew up
together, passing all their time with each other, and giving
themselves up to the wild ideas of their different characters.

Thus, in all their dreams, their wishes, and their
conversations, Vampa saw himself the captain of a vessel,
general of an army, or governor of a province. Teresa saw
herself rich, superbly attired, and attended by a train of
liveried domestics. Then, when they had thus passed the day
in building castles in the air, they separated their flocks, and
descended from the elevation of their dreams to the reality of
their humble position.
"One day the young shepherd told the count's steward that
he had seen a wolf come out of the Sabine mountains, and
prowl around his flock. The steward gave him a gun; this
was what Vampa longed for. This gun had an excellent
barrel, made at Breschia, and carrying a ball with the
precision of an English rifle; but one day the count broke the
stock, and had then cast the gun aside. This, however, was
nothing to a sculptor like Vampa; he examined the broken
stock, calculated what change it would require to adapt the
gun to his shoulder, and made a fresh stock, so beautifully
carved that it would have fetched fifteen or twenty piastres,
had he chosen to sell it. But nothing could be farther from his
thoughts. For a long time a gun had been the young man's
greatest ambition. In every country where independence has
taken the place of liberty, the first desire of a manly heart is
to possess a weapon, which at once renders him capable of
defence or attack, and, by rendering its owner terrible, often
makes him feared. From this moment Vampa devoted all his
leisure time to perfecting himself in the use of his precious
weapon; he purchased powder and ball, and everything
served him for a mark -- the trunk of some old and
moss-grown olive-tree, that grew on the Sabine mountains;
the fox, as he quitted his earth on some marauding excursion;
the eagle that soared above their heads: and thus he soon
became so expert, that Teresa overcame the terror she at first
felt at the report, and amused herself by watching him direct
the ball wherever he pleased, with as much accuracy as if he
placed it by hand.
"One evening a wolf emerged from a pine-wood hear which
they were usually stationed, but the wolf had scarcely
advanced ten yards ere he was dead. Proud of this exploit,
Vampa took the dead animal on his shoulders, and carried
him to the farm. These exploits had gained Luigi
considerable reputation. The man of superior abilities always
finds admirers, go where he will. He was spoken of as the
most adroit, the strongest, and the most courageous
contadino for ten leagues around; and although Teresa was
universally allowed to be the most beautiful girl of the
Sabines, no one had ever spoken to her of love, because it
was known that she was beloved by Vampa. And yet the
two young people had never declared their affection; they
had grown together like two trees whose roots are mingled,
whose branches intertwined, and whose intermingled
perfume rises to the heavens. Only their wish to see each
other had become a necessity, and they would have
preferred death to a day's separation. Teresa was sixteen,
and Vampa seventeen. About this time, a band of brigands
that had established itself in the Lepini mountains began to
be much spoken of. The brigands have never been really
extirpated from the neighborhood of Rome. Sometimes a
chief is wanted, but when a chief presents himself he rarely
has to wait long for a band of followers.
"The celebrated Cucumetto, pursued in the Abruzzo, driven
out of the kingdom of Naples, where he had carried on a
regular war, had crossed the Garigliano, like Manfred, and
had taken refuge on the banks of the Amasine between
Sonnino and Juperno. He strove to collect a band of
followers, and followed the footsteps of Decesaris and
Gasperone, whom he hoped to surpass. Many young men of
Palestrina, Frascati, and Pampinara had disappeared. Their

disappearance at first caused much disquietude; but it was
soon known that they had joined Cucumetto. After some
time Cucumetto became the object of universal attention; the
most extraordinary traits of ferocious daring and brutality
were related of him. One day he carried off a young girl, the
daughter of a surveyor of Frosinone. The bandit's laws are
positive; a young girl belongs first to him who carries her off,
then the rest draw lots for her, and she is abandoned to their
brutality until death relieves her sufferings. When their
parents are sufficiently rich to pay a ransom, a messenger is
sent to negotiate; the prisoner is hostage for the security of
the messenger; should the ransom be refused, the prisoner is
irrevocably lost. The young girl's lover was in Cucumetto's
troop; his name was Carlini. When she recognized her lover,
the poor girl extended her arms to him, and believed herself
safe; but Carlini felt his heart sink, for he but too well knew
the fate that awaited her. However, as he was a favorite with
Cucumetto, as he had for three years faithfully served him,
and as he had saved his life by shooting a dragoon who was
about to cut him down, he hoped the chief would have pity
on him. He took Cucumetto one side, while the young girl,
seated at the foot of a huge pine that stood in the centre of
the forest, made a veil of her picturesque head-dress to hide
her face from the lascivious gaze of the bandits. There he
told the chief all -- his affection for the prisoner, their
promises of mutual fidelity, and how every night, since he
had been near, they had met in some neighboring ruins.
"It so happened that night that Cucumetto had sent Carlini
to a village, so that he had been unable to go to the place of
meeting. Cucumetto had been there, however, by accident,
as he said, and had carried the maiden off. Carlini besought
his chief to make an exception in Rita's favor, as her father
was rich, and could pay a large ransom. Cucumetto seemed
to yield to his friend's entreaties, and bade him find a
shepherd to send to Rita's father at Frosinone. Carlini flew
joyfully to Rita, telling her she was saved, and bidding her
write to her father, to inform him what had occurred, and
that her ransom was fixed at three hundred piastres. Twelve
hours' delay was all that was granted -- that is, until nine the
next morning. The instant the letter was written, Carlini
seized it, and hastened to the plain to find a messenger. He
found a young shepherd watching his flock. The natural
messengers of the bandits are the shepherds who live
between the city and the mountains, between civilized and
savage life. The boy undertook the commission, promising to
be in Frosinone in less than an hour. Carlini returned,
anxious to see his mistress, and announce the joyful
intelligence. He found the troop in the glade, supping off the
provisions exacted as contributions from the peasants; but
his eye vainly sought Rita and Cucumetto among them. He
inquired where they were, and was answered by a burst of
laughter. A cold perspiration burst from every pore, and his
hair stood on end. He repeated his question. One of the
bandits rose, and offered him a glass filled with Orvietto,
saying, `To the health of the brave Cucumetto and the fair
Rita.' At this moment Carlini heard a woman's cry; he
divined the truth, seized the glass, broke it across the face of
him who presented it, and rushed towards the spot whence
the cry came. After a hundred yards he turned the corner of
the thicket; he found Rita senseless in the arms of Cucumetto.
At the sight of Carlini, Cucumetto rose, a pistol in each hand.
The two brigands looked at each other for a moment -- the
one with a smile of lasciviousness on his lips, the other with
the pallor of death on his brow. A terrible battle between the
two men seemed imminent; but by degrees Carlini's features
relaxed, his hand, which had grasped one of the pistols in his
belt, fell to his side. Rita lay between them. The moon lighted
the group.
"`Well,' said Cucumetto, `have you executed your
125


CHAPTER 33

commission?'

ROMAN BANDITS

behind.' All savage natures appreciate a desperate deed. No
other of the bandits would, perhaps, have done the same;
"`Yes, captain,' returned Carlini. `At nine o'clock to-morrow
but they all understood what Carlini had done. `Now, then,'
Rita's father will be here with the money.' -- `It is well; in the
cried Carlini, rising in his turn, and approaching the corpse,
meantime, we will have a merry night; this young girl is
his hand on the butt of one of his pistols, `does any one
charming, and does credit to your taste. Now, as I am not
dispute the possession of this woman with me?' -- `No,'
egotistical, we will return to our comrades and draw lots for
returned the chief, `she is thine.' Carlini raised her in his
her.' -- `You have determined, then, to abandon her to the
arms, and carried her out of the circle of firelight. Cucumetto
common law?" said Carlini.
placed his sentinels for the night, and the bandits wrapped
"`Why should an exception be made in her favor?'
themselves in their cloaks, and lay down before the fire. At
midnight the sentinel gave the alarm, and in an instant all
"`I thought that my entreaties' -were on the alert. It was Rita's father, who brought his
"`What right have you, any more than the rest, to ask for an daughter's ransom in person. `Here,' said he, to Cucumetto,
exception?' -- `It is true.' -- `But never mind,' continued `here are three hundred piastres; give me back my child. But
Cucumetto, laughing, `sooner or later your turn will come.' the chief, without taking the money, made a sign to him to
Carlini's teeth clinched convulsively.
follow. The old man obeyed. They both advanced beneath
"`Now, then,' said Cucumetto, advancing towards the other the trees, through whose branches streamed the moonlight.
Cucumetto stopped at last, and pointed to two persons
bandits, `are you coming?' -- `I follow you.'
grouped at the foot of a tree.
"Cucumetto departed, without losing sight of Carlini, for,
doubtless, he feared lest he should strike him unawares; but "`There,' said he, `demand thy child of Carlini; he will tell
nothing betrayed a hostile design on Carlini's part. He was thee what has become of her;' and he returned to his
standing, his arms folded, near Rita, who was still insensible. companions. The old man remained motionless; he felt that
Cucumetto fancied for a moment the young man was about some great and unforeseen misfortune hung over his head.
to take her in his arms and fly; but this mattered little to him At length he advanced toward the group, the meaning of
now Rita had been his; and as for the money, three hundred which he could not comprehend. As he approached, Carlini
piastres distributed among the band was so small a sum that raised his head, and the forms of two persons became visible
he cared little about it. He continued to follow the path to the to the old man's eyes. A woman lay on the ground, her head
glade; but, to his great surprise, Carlini arrived almost as resting on the knees of a man, who was seated by her; as he
soon as himself. `Let us draw lots! let us draw lots!' cried all raised his head, the woman's face became visible. The old
man recognized his child, and Carlini recognized the old
the brigands, when they saw the chief.
man. `I expected thee,' said the bandit to Rita's father. -"Their demand was fair, and the chief inclined his head in
`Wretch!' returned the old man, `what hast thou done?' and
sign of acquiescence. The eyes of all shone fiercely as they
he gazed with terror on Rita, pale and bloody, a knife buried
made their demand, and the red light of the fire made them
in her bosom. A ray of moonlight poured through the trees,
look like demons. The names of all, including Carlini, were
and lighted up the face of the dead. -- `Cucumetto had
placed in a hat, and the youngest of the band drew forth a
violated thy daughter,' said the bandit; `I loved her, therefore
ticket; the ticket bore the name of Diovolaccio. He was the
I slew her; for she would have served as the sport of the
man who had proposed to Carlini the health of their chief,
whole band.' The old man spoke not, and grew pale as death.
and to whom Carlini replied by breaking the glass across his
`Now,' continued Carlini, `if I have done wrongly, avenge
face. A large wound, extending from the temple to the
her;' and withdrawing the knife from the wound in Rita's
mouth, was bleeding profusely. Diovalaccio, seeing himself
bosom, he held it out to the old man with one hand, while
thus favored by fortune, burst into a loud laugh. `Captain,'
with the other he tore open his vest. -- `Thou hast done well!'
said he, `just now Carlini would not drink your health when
returned the old man in a hoarse voice; `embrace me, my
I proposed it to him; propose mine to him, and let us see if
son.' Carlini threw himself, sobbing like a child, into the
he will be more condescending to you than to me.' Every one
arms of his mistress's father. These were the first tears the
expected an explosion on Carlini's part; but to their great
man of blood had ever wept. `Now,' said the old man, `aid
surprise, he took a glass in one hand and a flask in the other,
me to bury my child.' Carlini fetched two pickaxes; and the
and filling it, -- `Your health, Diavolaccio,' said he calmly,
father and the lover began to dig at the foot of a huge oak,
and he drank it off, without his hand trembling in the least.
beneath which the young girl was to repose. When the grave
Then sitting down by the fire, `My supper,' said he; `my
was formed, the father kissed her first, and then the lover;
expedition has given me an appetite.' -- `Well done, Carlini!'
afterwards, one taking the head, the other the feet, they
cried the brigands; `that is acting like a good fellow;' and
placed her in the grave. Then they knelt on each side of the
they all formed a circle round the fire, while Diavolaccio
grave, and said the prayers of the dead. Then, when they
disappeared. Carlini ate and drank as if nothing had
had finished, they cast the earth over the corpse, until the
happened. The bandits looked on with astonishment at this
grave was filled. Then, extending his hand, the old man said;
singular conduct until they heard footsteps. They turned
`I thank you, my son; and now leave me alone.' -- `Yet' -round, and saw Diavolaccio bearing the young girl in his
replied Carlini. -- `Leave me, I command you.' Carlini
arms. Her head hung back, and her long hair swept the
obeyed, rejoined his comrades, folded himself in his cloak,
ground. As they entered the circle, the bandits could
and soon appeared to sleep as soundly as the rest. It had
perceive, by the firelight, the unearthly pallor of the young
been resolved the night before to change their encampment.
girl and of Diavolaccio. This apparition was so strange and
An hour before daybreak, Cucumetto aroused his men, and
so solemn, that every one rose, with the exception of Carlini,
gave the word to march. But Carlini would not quit the
who remained seated, and ate and drank calmly. Diavolaccio
forest, without knowing what had become of Rita's father.
advanced amidst the most profound silence, and laid Rita at
He went toward the place where he had left him. He found
the captain's feet. Then every one could understand the
the old man suspended from one of the branches of the oak
cause of the unearthly pallor in the young girl and the bandit.
which shaded his daughter's grave. He then took an oath of
A knife was plunged up to the hilt in Rita's left breast. Every
bitter vengeance over the dead body of the one and the tomb
one looked at Carlini; the sheath at his belt was empty. `Ah,
of the other. But he was unable to complete this oath, for two
ah,' said the chief, `I now understand why Carlini stayed
days afterwards, in an encounter with the Roman carbineers,
126

Carlini was killed. There was some surprise, however, that,
as he was with his face to the enemy, he should have
received a ball between his shoulders. That astonishment
ceased when one of the brigands remarked to his comrades
that Cucumetto was stationed ten paces in Carlini's rear
when he fell. On the morning of the departure from the
forest of Frosinone he had followed Carlini in the darkness,
and heard this oath of vengeance, and, like a wise man,
anticipated it. They told ten other stories of this bandit chief,
each more singular than the other. Thus, from Fondi to
Perusia, every one trembles at the name of Cucumetto.

of a brigand instead of a serpent, and this look from Teresa
showed to him that she was a worthy daughter of Eve, and
he returned to the forest, pausing several times on his way,
under the pretext of saluting his protectors. Several days
elapsed, and they neither saw nor heard of Cucumetto. The
time of the Carnival was at hand. The Count of San-Felice
announced a grand masked ball, to which all that were
distinguished in Rome were invited. Teresa had a great
desire to see this ball. Luigi asked permission of his protector,
the steward, that she and he might be present amongst the
servants of the house. This was granted. The ball was given
by the Count for the particular pleasure of his daughter
"These narratives were frequently the theme of conversation
Carmela, whom he adored. Carmela was precisely the age
between Luigi and Teresa. The young girl trembled very
and figure of Teresa, and Teresa was as handsome as
much at hearing the stories; but Vampa reassured her with a
Carmela. On the evening of the ball Teresa was attired in her
smile, tapping the butt of his good fowling-piece, which
best, her most brilliant ornaments in her hair, and gayest
threw its ball so well; and if that did not restore her courage,
glass beads, -- she was in the costume of the women of
he pointed to a crow, perched on some dead branch, took
Frascati. Luigi wore the very picturesque garb of the Roman
aim, touched the trigger, and the bird fell dead at the foot of
peasant at holiday time. They both mingled, as they had
the tree. Time passed on, and the two young people had
leave to do, with the servants and peasants.
agreed to be married when Vampa should be twenty and
Teresa nineteen years of age. They were both orphans, and "The festa was magnificent; not only was the villa brilliantly
had only their employers' leave to ask, which had been illuminated, but thousands of colored lanterns were
already sought and obtained. One day when they were suspended from the trees in the garden; and very soon the
talking over their plans for the future, they heard two or palace overflowed to the terraces, and the terraces to the
three reports of firearms, and then suddenly a man came out garden-walks. At each cross-path was an orchestra, and
of the wood, near which the two young persons used to tables spread with refreshments; the guests stopped, formed
graze their flocks, and hurried towards them. When he came quadrilles, and danced in any part of the grounds they
within hearing, he exclaimed. `I am pursued; can you pleased. Carmela was attired like a woman of Sonnino. Her
conceal me?' They knew full well that this fugitive must be a cap was embroidered with pearls, the pins in her hair were
bandit; but there is an innate sympathy between the Roman of gold and diamonds, her girdle was of Turkey silk, with
brigand and the Roman peasant and the latter is always large embroidered flowers, her bodice and skirt were of
ready to aid the former. Vampa, without saying a word, cashmere, her apron of Indian muslin, and the buttons of her
hastened to the stone that closed up the entrance to their corset were of jewels. Two of her companions were dressed,
grotto, drew it away, made a sign to the fugitive to take the one as a woman of Nettuno, and the other as a woman of
refuge there, in a retreat unknown to every one, closed the La Riccia. Four young men of the richest and noblest families
stone upon him, and then went and resumed his seat by of Rome accompanied them with that Italian freedom which
Teresa. Instantly afterwards four carbineers, on horseback, has not its parallel in any other country in the world. They
appeared on the edge of the wood; three of them appeared were
attired
as
peasants
of
Albano,
Velletri,
to be looking for the fugitive, while the fourth dragged a Civita-Castellana, and Sora. We need hardly add that these
brigand prisoner by the neck. The three carbineers looked peasant costumes, like those of the young women, were
about carefully on every side, saw the young peasants, and brilliant with gold and jewels.
galloping up, began to question them. They had seen no one.
"Carmela wished to form a quadrille, but there was one lady
`That is very annoying,' said the brigadier; for the man we
wanting. Carmela looked all around her, but not one of the
are looking for is the chief.' -- `Cucumetto?' cried Luigi and
guests had a costume similar to her own, or those of her
Teresa at the same moment.
companions. The Count of San-Felice pointed out Teresa,
"`Yes,' replied the brigadier; `and as his head is valued at a who was hanging on Luigi's arm in a group of peasants.
thousand Roman crowns, there would have been five `Will you allow me, father?' said Carmela. -- `Certainly,'
hundred for you, if you had helped us to catch him.' The two replied the count, `are we not in Carnival time?' -- Carmela
young persons exchanged looks. The brigadier had a turned towards the young man who was talking with her,
moment's hope. Five hundred Roman crowns are three and saying a few words to him, pointed with her finger to
thousand lire, and three thousand lire are a fortune for two Teresa. The young man looked, bowed in obedience, and
poor orphans who are going to be married.
then went to Teresa, and invited her to dance in a quadrille
directed by the count's daughter. Teresa felt a flush pass over
"`Yes, it is very annoying,' said Vampa; `but we have not
her face; she looked at Luigi, who could not refuse his assent.
seen him.'
Luigi slowly relinquished Teresa's arm, which he had held
"Then the carbineers scoured the country in different beneath his own, and Teresa, accompanied by her elegant
directions, but in vain; then, after a time, they disappeared. cavalier, took her appointed place with much agitation in the
Vampa then removed the stone, and Cucumetto came out. aristocratic quadrille. Certainly, in the eyes of an artist, the
Through the crevices in the granite he had seen the two exact and strict costume of Teresa had a very different
young peasants talking with the carbineers, and guessed the character from that of Carmela and her companions; and
subject of their parley. He had read in the countenances of Teresa was frivolous and coquettish, and thus the
Luigi and Teresa their steadfast resolution not to surrender embroidery and muslins, the cashmere waist-girdles, all
him, and he drew from his pocket a purse full of gold, which dazzled her, and the reflection of sapphires and diamonds
he offered to them. But Vampa raised his head proudly; as to almost turned her giddy brain.
Teresa, her eyes sparkled when she thought of all the fine
"Luigi felt a sensation hitherto unknown arising in his mind.
gowns and gay jewellery she could buy with this purse of
It was like an acute pain which gnawed at his heart, and
gold.
then thrilled through his whole body. He followed with his
"Cucumetto was a cunning fiend, and had assumed the form eye each movement of Teresa and her cavalier; when their
127


CHAPTER 33


ROMAN BANDITS

hands touched, he felt as though he should swoon; every
pulse beat with violence, and it seemed as though a bell were
ringing in his ears. When they spoke, although Teresa
listened timidly and with downcast eyes to the conversation
of her cavalier, as Luigi could read in the ardent looks of the
good-looking young man that his language was that of
praise, it seemed as if the whole world was turning round
with him, and all the voices of hell were whispering in his
ears ideas of murder and assassination. Then fearing that his
paroxysm might get the better of him, he clutched with one
hand the branch of a tree against which he was leaning, and
with the other convulsively grasped the dagger with a
carved handle which was in his belt, and which, unwittingly,
he drew from the scabbard from time to time. Luigi was
jealous! He felt that, influenced by her ambitions and
coquettish disposition, Teresa might escape him.
"The young peasant girl, at first timid and scared, soon
recovered herself. We have said that Teresa was handsome,
but this is not all; Teresa was endowed with all those wild
graces which are so much more potent than our affected and
studied elegancies. She had almost all the honors of the
quadrille, and if she were envious of the Count of
San-Felice's daughter, we will not undertake to say that
Carmela was not jealous of her. And with overpowering
compliments her handsome cavalier led her back to the place
whence he had taken her, and where Luigi awaited her.
Twice or thrice during the dance the young girl had glanced
at Luigi, and each time she saw that he was pale and that his
features were agitated, once even the blade of his knife, half
drawn from its sheath, had dazzled her eyes with its sinister
glare. Thus, it was almost tremblingly that she resumed her
lover's arm. The quadrille had been most perfect, and it was
evident there was a great demand for a repetition, Carmela
alone objecting to it, but the Count of San-Felice besought his
daughter so earnestly, that she acceded. One of the cavaliers
then hastened to invite Teresa, without whom it was
impossible for the quadrille to be formed, but the young girl
had disappeared. The truth was, that Luigi had not felt the
strength to support another such trial, and, half by
persuasion and half by force, he had removed Teresa toward
another part of the garden. Teresa had yielded in spite of
herself, but when she looked at the agitated countenance of
the young man, she understood by his silence and trembling
voice that something strange was passing within him. She
herself was not exempt from internal emotion, and without
having done anything wrong, yet fully comprehended that
Luigi was right in reproaching her. Why, she did not know,
but yet she did not the less feel that these reproaches were
merited. However, to Teresa's great astonishment, Luigi
remained mute, and not a word escaped his lips the rest of
the evening. When the chill of the night had driven away the
guests from the gardens, and the gates of the villa were
closed on them for the festa in-doors, he took Teresa quite
away, and as he left her at her home, he said, --

could, and when he had quite disappeared, she went into the
house with a sigh.
"That night a memorable event occurred, due, no doubt, to
the imprudence of some servant who had neglected to
extinguish the lights. The Villa of San-Felice took fire in the
rooms adjoining the very apartment of the lovely Carmela.
Awakened in the night by the light of the flames, she sprang
out of bed, wrapped herself in a dressing-gown, and
attempted to escape by the door, but the corridor by which
she hoped to fly was already a prey to the flames. She then
returned to her room, calling for help as loudly as she could,
when suddenly her window, which was twenty feet from the
ground, was opened, a young peasant jumped into the
chamber, seized her in his arms, and with superhuman skill
and strength conveyed her to the turf of the grass-plot,
where she fainted. When she recovered, her father was by
her side. All the servants surrounded her, offering her
assistance. An entire wing of the villa was burnt down; but
what of that, as long as Carmela was safe and uninjured?
Her preserver was everywhere sought for, but he did not
appear; he was inquired after, but no one had seen him.
Carmela was greatly troubled that she had not recognized
him. As the count was immensely rich, excepting the danger
Carmela had run, -- and the marvellous manner in which she
had escaped, made that appear to him rather a favor of
providence than a real misfortune, -- the loss occasioned by
the conflagration was to him but a trifle.
"The next day, at the usual hour, the two young peasants
were on the borders of the forest. Luigi arrived first. He
came toward Teresa in high spirits, and seemed to have
completely forgotten the events of the previous evening. The
young girl was very pensive, but seeing Luigi so cheerful,
she on her part assumed a smiling air, which was natural to
her when she was not excited or in a passion. Luigi took her
arm beneath his own, and led her to the door of the grotto.
Then he paused. The young girl, perceiving that there was
something extraordinary, looked at him steadfastly. `Teresa,'
said Luigi, `yesterday evening you told me you would give
all the world to have a costume similar to that of the count's
daughter.' -- `Yes,' replied Teresa with astonishment; `but I
was mad to utter such a wish.' -- `And I replied, "Very well,
you shall have it."' -- `Yes,' replied the young girl, whose
astonishment increased at every word uttered by Luigi, `but
of course your reply was only to please me.'
"`I have promised no more than I have given you, Teresa,'
said Luigi proudly. `Go into the grotto and dress yourself.'
At these words he drew away the stone, and showed Teresa
the grotto, lighted up by two wax lights, which burnt on
each side of a splendid mirror; on a rustic table, made by
Luigi, were spread out the pearl necklace and the diamond
pins, and on a chair at the side was laid the rest of the
costume.

"Teresa uttered a cry of joy, and, without inquiring whence
this attire came, or even thanking Luigi, darted into the
grotto, transformed into a dressing-room. Luigi pushed the
stone behind her, for on the crest of a small adjacent hill
which cut off the view toward Palestrina, he saw a traveller
on horseback, stopping a moment, as if uncertain of his road,
"`And what said your cavalier to you?' -- `He said it only
and thus presenting against the blue sky that perfect outline
depended on myself to have it, and I had only one word to
which is peculiar to distant objects in southern climes. When
say.'
he saw Luigi, he put his horse into a gallop and advanced
"`He was right,' said Luigi. `Do you desire it as ardently as toward him. Luigi was not mistaken. The traveller, who was
you say?' -- `Yes.' -- `Well, then, you shall have it!'
going from Palestrina to Tivoli, had mistaken his way; the
young man directed him; but as at a distance of a quarter of
"The young girl, much astonished, raised her head to look at
a mile the road again divided into three ways, and on
him, but his face was so gloomy and terrible that her words
reaching these the traveller might again stray from his route,
froze to her lips. As Luigi spoke thus, he left her. Teresa
he begged Luigi to be his guide. Luigi threw his cloak on the
followed him with her eyes into the darkness as long as she
ground, placed his carbine on his shoulder, and freed from
128
"`Teresa, what were you thinking of as you danced opposite
the young Countess of San-Felice?' -- `I thought,' replied the
young girl, with all the frankness of her nature, `that I would
give half my life for a costume such as she wore.'

his heavy covering, preceded the traveller with the rapid
step of a mountaineer, which a horse can scarcely keep up
with. In ten minutes Luigi and the traveller reached the
cross-roads. On arriving there, with an air as majestic as that
of an emperor, he stretched his hand towards that one of the
roads which the traveller was to follow. -- "That is your road,
excellency, and now you cannot again mistake.' -- `And here
is your recompense,' said the traveller, offering the young
herdsman some small pieces of money.
"`Thank you,' said Luigi, drawing back his hand; `I render a
service, I do not sell it.' -- `Well,' replied the traveller, who
seemed used to this difference between the servility of a man
of the cities and the pride of the mountaineer, `if you refuse
wages, you will, perhaps, accept a gift.' -- `Ah, yes, that is
another thing.' -- `Then,' said the traveller, `take these two
Venetian sequins and give them to your bride, to make
herself a pair of earrings.'
"`And then do you take this poniard,' said the young
herdsman; `you will not find one better carved between
Albano and Civita-Castellana.'
"`I accept it,' answered the traveller, `but then the obligation
will be on my side, for this poniard is worth more than two
sequins.' -- `For a dealer perhaps; but for me, who engraved
it myself, it is hardly worth a piastre.'
"`What is your name?' inquired the traveller. -- `Luigi
Vampa,' replied the shepherd, with the same air as he would
have replied, Alexander, King of Macedon. -- `And yours?' -`I,' said the traveller, `am called Sinbad the Sailor.'" Franz
d'Epinay started with surprise.
"Sinbad the Sailor." he said.
"Yes," replied the narrator; "that was the name which the
traveller gave to Vampa as his own."
"Well, and what may you have to say against this name?"
inquired Albert; "it is a very pretty name, and the adventures
of the gentleman of that name amused me very much in my
youth, I must confess." -- Franz said no more. The name of
Sinbad the Sailor, as may well be supposed, awakened in
him a world of recollections, as had the name of the Count of
Monte Cristo on the previous evening.
"Proceed!" said he to the host.
"Vampa put the two sequins haughtily into his pocket, and
slowly returned by the way he had gone. As he came within
two or three hundred paces of the grotto, he thought he
heard a cry. He listened to know whence this sound could
proceed. A moment afterwards he thought he heard his own
name pronounced distinctly. The cry proceeded from the
grotto. He bounded like a chamois, cocking his carbine as he
went, and in a moment reached the summit of a hill opposite
to that on which he had perceived the traveller. Three cries
for help came more distinctly to his ear. He cast his eyes
around him and saw a man carrying off Teresa, as Nessus,
the centaur, carried Dejanira. This man, who was hastening
towards the wood, was already three-quarters of the way on
the road from the grotto to the forest. Vampa measured the
distance; the man was at least two hundred paces in advance
of him, and there was not a chance of overtaking him. The
young shepherd stopped, as if his feet had been rooted to the
ground; then he put the butt of his carbine to his shoulder,
took aim at the ravisher, followed him for a second in his
track, and then fired. The ravisher stopped suddenly, his
knees bent under him, and he fell with Teresa in his arms.
The young girl rose instantly, but the man lay on the earth
struggling in the agonies of death. Vampa then rushed
towards Teresa; for at ten paces from the dying man her legs
had failed her, and she had dropped on her knees, so that
the young man feared that the ball that had brought down

his enemy, had also wounded his betrothed. Fortunately, she
was unscathed, and it was fright alone that had overcome
Teresa. When Luigi had assured himself that she was safe
and unharmed, he turned towards the wounded man. He
had just expired, with clinched hands, his mouth in a spasm
of agony, and his hair on end in the sweat of death. His eyes
remained open and menacing. Vampa approached the
corpse, and recognized Cucumetto. From the day on which
the bandit had been saved by the two young peasants, he
had been enamoured of Teresa, and had sworn she should
be his. From that time he had watched them, and profiting
by the moment when her lover had left her alone, had
carried her off, and believed he at length had her in his
power, when the ball, directed by the unerring skill of the
young herdsman, had pierced his heart. Vampa gazed on
him for a moment without betraying the slightest emotion;
while, on the contrary, Teresa, shuddering in every limb,
dared not approach the slain ruffian but by degrees, and
threw a hesitating glance at the dead body over the shoulder
of her lover. Suddenly Vampa turned toward his mistress: -`Ah,' said he -- `good, good! You are dressed; it is now my
turn to dress myself.'
"Teresa was clothed from head to foot in the garb of the
Count of San-Felice's daughter. Vampa took Cucumetto's
body in his arms and conveyed it to the grotto, while in her
turn Teresa remained outside. If a second traveller had
passed, he would have seen a strange thing, -- a shepherdess
watching her flock, clad in a cashmere grown, with ear-rings
and necklace of pearls, diamond pins, and buttons of
sapphires, emeralds, and rubies. He would, no doubt, have
believed that he had returned to the times of Florian, and
would have declared, on reaching Paris, that he had met an
Alpine shepherdess seated at the foot of the Sabine Hill. At
the end of a quarter of an hour Vampa quitted the grotto; his
costume was no less elegant than that of Teresa. He wore a
vest of garnet-colored velvet, with buttons of cut gold; a silk
waistcoat covered with embroidery; a Roman scarf tied
round his neck; a cartridge-box worked with gold, and red
and green silk; sky-blue velvet breeches, fastened above the
knee with diamond buckles; garters of deerskin, worked
with a thousand arabesques, and a hat whereon hung
ribbons of all colors; two watches hung from his girdle, and
a splendid poniard was in his belt. Teresa uttered a cry of
admiration. Vampa in this attire resembled a painting by
Leopold Robert, or Schnetz. He had assumed the entire
costume of Cucumetto. The young man saw the effect
produced on his betrothed, and a smile of pride passed over
his lips. -- `Now,' he said to Teresa, `are you ready to share
my fortune, whatever it may be?' -- `Oh, yes!' exclaimed the
young girl enthusiastically. -- `And follow me wherever I
go?' -- `To the world's end.' -- `Then take my arm, and let us
on; we have no time to lose.' -- The young girl did so without
questioning her lover as to where he was conducting her, for
he appeared to her at this moment as handsome, proud, and
powerful as a god. They went towards the forest, and soon
entered it. We need scarcely say that all the paths of the
mountain were known to Vampa; he therefore went forward
without a moment's hesitation, although there was no beaten
track, but he knew his path by looking at the trees and
bushes, and thus they kept on advancing for nearly an hour
and a half. At the end of this time they had reached the
thickest of the forest. A torrent, whose bed was dry, led into
a deep gorge. Vampa took this wild road, which, enclosed
between two ridges, and shadowed by the tufted umbrage of
the pines, seemed, but for the difficulties of its descent, that
path to Avernus of which Virgil speaks. Teresa had become
alarmed at the wild and deserted look of the plain around
her, and pressed closely against her guide, not uttering a
syllable; but as she saw him advance with even step and
129


CHAPTER 33


ROMAN BANDITS

composed countenance, she endeavored to repress her
emotion. Suddenly, about ten paces from them, a man
advanced from behind a tree and aimed at Vampa. -- `Not
another step,' he said, `or you are a dead man.' -- `What,
then,' said Vampa, raising his hand with a gesture of disdain,
while Teresa, no longer able to restrain her alarm, clung
closely to him, `do wolves rend each other?' -- `Who are
you?' inquired the sentinel. -- `I am Luigi Vampa, shepherd
of the San-Felice farm.' -- `What do you want?' -- `I would
speak with your companions who are in the glade at Rocca
Bianca.' -- `Follow me, then,' said the sentinel; `or, as you
know your way, go first.' -- Vampa smiled disdainfully at
this precaution on the part of the bandit, went before Teresa,
and continued to advance with the same firm and easy step
as before. At the end of ten minutes the bandit made them a
sign to stop. The two young persons obeyed. Then the bandit
thrice imitated the cry of a crow; a croak answered this
signal. -- `Good!' said the sentry, `you may now go on.' -Luigi and Teresa again set forward; as they went on Teresa
clung tremblingly to her lover at the sight of weapons and
the glistening of carbines through the trees. The retreat of
Rocca Bianca was at the top of a small mountain, which no
doubt in former days had been a volcano -- an extinct
volcano before the days when Remus and Romulus had
deserted Alba to come and found the city of Rome. Teresa
and Luigi reached the summit, and all at once found
themselves in the presence of twenty bandits. `Here is a
young man who seeks and wishes to speak to you,' said the
sentinel. -- `What has he to say?' inquired the young man
who was in command in the chief's absence. -- `I wish to say
that I am tired of a shepherd's life,' was Vampa's reply. -`Ah, I understand,' said the lieutenant; `and you seek
admittance into our ranks?' -- `Welcome!' cried several
bandits from Ferrusino, Pampinara, and Anagni, who had
recognized Luigi Vampa. -- `Yes, but I came to ask
something more than to be your companion.' -- `And what
may that be?' inquired the bandits with astonishment. -- `I
come to ask to be your captain,' said the young man. The
bandits shouted with laughter. `And what have you done to
aspire to this honor?' demanded the lieutenant. -- `I have
killed your chief, Cucumetto, whose dress I now wear; and I
set fire to the villa San-Felice to procure a wedding-dress for
my betrothed.' An hour afterwards Luigi Vampa was chosen
captain, vice Cucumetto deceased."
"Well, my dear Albert," said Franz, turning towards his

130

friend; "what think you of citizen Luigi Vampa?"
"I say he is a myth," replied Albert, "and never had an
existence."
"And what may a myth be?" inquired Pastrini.
"The explanation would be too long, my dear landlord,"
replied Franz.
"And you say that Signor Vampa exercises his profession at
this moment in the environs of Rome?"
"And with a boldness of which no bandit before him ever
gave an example."
"Then the police have vainly tried to lay hands on him?"
"Why, you see, he has a good understanding with the
shepherds in the plains, the fishermen of the Tiber, and the
smugglers of the coast. They seek for him in the mountains,
and he is on the waters; they follow him on the waters, and
he is on the open sea; then they pursue him, and he has
suddenly taken refuge in the islands, at Giglio, Guanouti, or
Monte Cristo; and when they hunt for him there, he
reappears suddenly at Albano, Tivoli, or La Riccia."
"And how does he behave towards travellers?"
"Alas! his plan is very simple. It depends on the distance he
may be from the city, whether he gives eight hours, twelve
hours, or a day wherein to pay their ransom; and when that
time has elapsed he allows another hour's grace. At the
sixtieth minute of this hour, if the money is not forthcoming,
he blows out the prisoner's brains with a pistol-shot, or
plants his dagger in his heart, and that settles the account."
"Well, Albert," inquired Franz of his companion, "are you
still disposed to go to the Colosseum by the outer wall?"
"Quite so," said Albert, "if the way be picturesque." The clock
struck nine as the door opened, and a coachman appeared.
"Excellencies," said he, "the coach is ready."
"Well, then," said Franz, "let us to the Colosseum."
"By the Porta del Popolo or by the streets, your excellencies?"
"By the streets, morbleu, by the streets!" cried Franz.
"Ah, my dear fellow," said Albert, rising, and lighting his
third cigar, "really, I thought you had more courage." So
saying, the two young men went down the staircase, and got
into the carriage.


Chapter 34

The Colosseum

F

ranz had so managed his route, that during the ride to
the Colosseum they passed not a single ancient ruin, so
that no preliminary impression interfered to mitigate the
colossal proportions of the gigantic building they came to
admire. The road selected was a continuation of the Via
Sistina; then by cutting off the right angle of the street in
which stands Santa Maria Maggiore and proceeding by the
Via Urbana and San Pietro in Vincoli, the travellers would
find themselves directly opposite the Colosseum. This
itinerary possessed another great advantage, -- that of
leaving Franz at full liberty to indulge his deep reverie upon
the subject of Signor Pastrini's story, in which his mysterious
host of Monte Cristo was so strangely mixed up. Seated with
folded arms in a corner of the carriage, he continued to
ponder over the singular history he had so lately listened to,
and to ask himself an interminable number of questions
touching its various circumstances without, however,
arriving at a satisfactory reply to any of them. One fact more
than the rest brought his friend "Sinbad the Sailor" back to
his recollection, and that was the mysterious sort of intimacy
that seemed to exist between the brigands and the sailors;
and Pastrini's account of Vampa's having found refuge on
board the vessels of smugglers and fishermen, reminded
Franz of the two Corsican bandits he had found supping so
amicably with the crew of the little yacht, which had even
deviated from its course and touched at Porto-Vecchio for
the sole purpose of landing them. The very name assumed
by his host of Monte Cristo and again repeated by the
landlord of the Hotel de Londres, abundantly proved to him
that his island friend was playing his philanthropic part on
the shores of Piombino, Civita-Vecchio, Ostia, and Gaeta, as
on those of Corsica, Tuscany, and Spain; and further, Franz
bethought him of having heard his singular entertainer
speak both of Tunis and Palermo, proving thereby how
largely his circle of acquaintances extended.

much the more difficult to break their bondage, as the guides
alone are permitted to visit these monuments with torches in
their hands. Thus, then, the young men made no attempt at
resistance, but blindly and confidingly surrendered
themselves into the care and custody of their conductors.
Albert had already made seven or eight similar excursions to
the Colosseum, while his less favored companion trod for
the first time in his life the classic ground forming the
monument of Flavius Vespasian; and, to his credit be it
spoken, his mind, even amid the glib loquacity of the guides,
was duly and deeply touched with awe and enthusiastic
admiration of all he saw; and certainly no adequate notion of
these stupendous ruins can be formed save by such as have
visited them, and more especially by moonlight, at which
time the vast proportions of the building appear twice as
large when viewed by the mysterious beams of a southern
moonlit sky, whose rays are sufficiently clear and vivid to
light the horizon with a glow equal to the soft twilight of an
eastern clime. Scarcely, therefore, had the reflective Franz
walked a hundred steps beneath the interior porticoes of the
ruin, than, abandoning Albert to the guides (who would by
no means yield their prescriptive right of carrying their
victims through the routine regularly laid down, and as
regularly followed by them, but dragged the unconscious
visitor to the various objects with a pertinacity that admitted
of no appeal, beginning, as a matter of course, with the
Lions' Den, and finishing with Caesar's "Podium,"), to escape
a jargon and mechanical survey of the wonders by which he
was surrounded, Franz ascended a half-dilapidated staircase,
and, leaving them to follow their monotonous round, seated
himself at the foot of a column, and immediately opposite a
large aperture, which permitted him to enjoy a full and
undisturbed view of the gigantic dimensions of the majestic
ruin.

Franz had remained for nearly a quarter of an hour perfectly
hidden by the shadow of the vast column at whose base he
had found a resting-place, and from whence his eyes
followed the motions of Albert and his guides, who, holding
torches in their hands, had emerged from a vomitarium at
the opposite extremity of the Colosseum, and then again
disappeared down the steps conducting to the seats reserved
for the Vestal virgins, resembling, as they glided along, some
restless shades following the flickering glare of so many
ignes-fatui. All at once his ear caught a sound resembling
that of a stone rolling down the staircase opposite the one by
which he had himself ascended. There was nothing
The usual guide from the hotel having followed them, they
remarkable in the circumstance of a fragment of granite
had paid two conductors, nor is it possible, at Rome, to
giving way and falling heavily below; but it seemed to him
avoid this abundant supply of guides; besides the ordinary
that the substance that fell gave way beneath the pressure of
cicerone, who seizes upon you directly you set foot in your
a foot, and also that some one, who endeavored as much as
hotel, and never quits you while you remain in the city, there
possible to prevent his footsteps from being heard, was
is also a special cicerone belonging to each monument -- nay,
approaching the spot where he sat. Conjecture soon became
almost to each part of a monument. It may, therefore, be
certainty, for the figure of a man was distinctly visible to
easily imagined there is no scarcity of guides at the
Franz, gradually emerging from the staircase opposite, upon
Colosseum, that wonder of all ages, which Martial thus
which the moon was at that moment pouring a full tide of
eulogizes: "Let Memphis cease to boast the barbarous
silvery brightness.
miracles of her pyramids, and the wonders of Babylon be
talked of no more among us; all must bow to the superiority The stranger thus presenting himself was probably a person
of the gigantic labor of the Caesars, and the many voices of who, like Franz, preferred the enjoyment of solitude and his
Fame spread far and wide the surpassing merits of this own thoughts to the frivolous gabble of the guides. And his
incomparable monument."
appearance had nothing extraordinary in it; but the
hesitation with which he proceeded, stopping and listening
As for Albert and Franz, they essayed not to escape from
with anxious attention at every step he took, convinced
their ciceronian tyrants; and, indeed, it would have been so
131
But however the mind of the young man might be absorbed
in these reflections, they were at once dispersed at the sight
of the dark frowning ruins of the stupendous Colosseum,
through the various openings of which the pale moonlight
played and flickered like the unearthly gleam from the eyes
of the wandering dead. The carriage stopped near the Meta
Sudans; the door was opened, and the young men, eagerly
alighting, found themselves opposite a cicerone, who
appeared to have sprung up from the ground, so unexpected
was his appearance.


CHAPTER 34


THE COLOSSEUM

Franz that he expected the arrival of some person. By a sort
of instinctive impulse, Franz withdrew as much as possible
behind his pillar. About ten feet from the spot where he and
the stranger were, the roof had given way, leaving a large
round opening, through which might be seen the blue vault
of heaven, thickly studded with stars. Around this opening,
which had, possibly, for ages permitted a free entrance to the
brilliant moonbeams that now illumined the vast pile, grew
a quantity of creeping plants, whose delicate green branches
stood out in bold relief against the clear azure of the
firmament, while large masses of thick, strong fibrous shoots
forced their way through the chasm, and hung floating to
and fro, like so many waving strings. The person whose
mysterious arrival had attracted the attention of Franz stood
in a kind of half-light, that rendered it impossible to
distinguish his features, although his dress was easily made
out. He wore a large brown mantle, one fold of which,
thrown over his left shoulder, served likewise to mask the
lower part of his countenance, while the upper part was
completely hidden by his broad-brimmed hat. The lower
part of his dress was more distinctly visible by the bright
rays of the moon, which, entering through the broken ceiling,
shed their refulgent beams on feet cased in elegantly made
boots of polished leather, over which descended fashionably
cut trousers of black cloth.
From the imperfect means Franz had of judging, he could
only come to one conclusion, -- that the person whom he was
thus watching certainly belonged to no inferior station of life.
Some few minutes had elapsed, and the stranger began to
show manifest signs of impatience, when a slight noise was
heard outside the aperture in the roof, and almost
immediately a dark shadow seemed to obstruct the flood of
light that had entered it, and the figure of a man was clearly
seen gazing with eager scrutiny on the immense space
beneath him; then, as his eye caught sight of him in the
mantle, he grasped a floating mass of thickly matted boughs,
and glided down by their help to within three or four feet of
the ground, and then leaped lightly on his feet. The man
who had performed this daring act with so much
indifference wore the Transtevere costume. "I beg your
excellency's pardon for keeping you waiting," said the man,
in the Roman dialect, "but I don't think I'm many minutes
after my time, ten o'clock has just struck on the Lateran."
"Say not a word about being late," replied the stranger in
purest Tuscan; "'tis I who am too soon. But even if you had
caused me to wait a little while, I should have felt quite sure
that the delay was not occasioned by any fault of yours."

the smallest pity. The other sufferer is sentenced to be
decapitato;** and he, your excellency, is poor Peppino."
* Knocked on the head. ** Beheaded.
"The fact is, that you have inspired not only the pontifical
government, but also the neighboring states, with such
extreme fear, that they are glad of all opportunity of making
an example."
"But Peppino did not even belong to my band: he was
merely a poor shepherd, whose only crime consisted in
furnishing us with provisions."
"Which makes him your accomplice to all intents and
purposes. But mark the distinction with which he is treated;
instead of being knocked on the head as you would be if
once they caught hold of you, he is simply sentenced to be
guillotined, by which means, too, the amusements of the day
are diversified, and there is a spectacle to please every
spectator."
"Without reckoning the wholly unexpected one I am
preparing to surprise them with."
"My good friend," said the man in the cloak, "excuse me for
saying that you seem to me precisely in the mood to commit
some wild or extravagant act."
"Perhaps I am; but one thing I have resolved on, and that is,
to stop at nothing to restore a poor devil to liberty, who has
got into this scrape solely from having served me. I should
hate and despise myself as a coward did I desert the brave
fellow in his present extremity."
"And what do you mean to do?"
"To surround the scaffold with twenty of my best men, who,
at a signal from me, will rush forward directly Peppino is
brought for execution, and, by the assistance of their stilettos,
drive back the guard, and carry off the prisoner."
"That seems to me as hazardous as uncertain, and convinces
me that my scheme is far better than yours."
"And what is your excellency's project?"
"Just this. I will so advantageously bestow 2,000 piastres,
that the person receiving them shall obtain a respite till next
year for Peppino; and during that year, another skilfully
placed 1,000 piastres will afford him the means of escaping
from his prison."
"And do you feel sure of succeeding?"
"Pardieu!" exclaimed the man in the cloak, suddenly
expressing himself in French.

"Your excellency is perfectly right in so thinking," said the
man; "I came here direct from the Castle of St. Angelo, and I "What did your excellency say?" inquired the other.
had an immense deal of trouble before I could get a chance
"I said, my good fellow, that I would do more single-handed
to speak to Beppo."
by the means of gold than you and all your troop could
effect with stilettos, pistols, carbines, and blunderbusses
"And who is Beppo?"
included. Leave me, then, to act, and have no fears for the
"Oh, Beppo is employed in the prison, and I give him so
result."
much a year to let me know what is going on within his
"At least, there can be no harm in myself and party being in
holiness's castle."
readiness, in case your excellency should fail."
"Indeed! You are a provident person, I see."
"None whatever. Take what precautions you please, if it is
"Why, you see, no one knows what may happen. Perhaps
any satisfaction to you to do so; but rely upon my obtaining
some of these days I may be entrapped, like poor Peppino
the reprieve I seek."
and may be very glad to have some little nibbling mouse to
"Remember, the execution is fixed for the day after
gnaw the meshes of my net, and so help me out of prison."
tomorrow, and that you have but one day to work in."
"Briefly, what did you glean?"
"And what of that? Is not a day divided into twenty-four
"That two executions of considerable interest will take place
hours, each hour into sixty minutes, and every minute
the day after to-morrow at two o'clock, as is customary at
sub-divided into sixty seconds? Now in 86,400 seconds very
Rome at the commencement of all great festivals. One of the
many things can be done."
culprits will be mazzolato;* he is an atrocious villain, who
murdered the priest who brought him up, and deserves not "And how shall I know whether your excellency has
132

succeeded or not."
"Oh, that is very easily arranged. I have engaged the three
lower windows at the Cafe Rospoli; should I have obtained
the requisite pardon for Peppino, the two outside windows
will be hung with yellow damasks, and the centre with
white, having a large cross in red marked on it."
"And whom will you employ to carry the reprieve to the
officer directing the execution?"
"Send one of your men, disguised as a penitent friar, and I
will give it to him. His dress will procure him the means of
approaching the scaffold itself, and he will deliver the
official order to the officer, who, in his turn, will hand it to
the executioner; in the meantime, it will be as well to
acquaint Peppino with what we have determined on, if it be
only to prevent his dying of fear or losing his senses, because
in either case a very useless expense will have been
incurred."
"Your excellency," said the man, "you are fully persuaded of
my entire devotion to you, are you not?"
"Nay, I flatter myself that there can be no doubt of it," replied
the cavalier in the cloak.
"Well, then, only fulfil your promise of rescuing Peppino,
and henceforward you shall receive not only devotion, but
the most absolute obedience from myself and those under
me that one human being can render to another."

summons till he had satisfied himself that the two men
whose conversation he had overheard were at a sufficient
distance to prevent his encountering them in his descent. In
ten minutes after the strangers had departed, Franz was on
the road to the Piazza de Spagni, listening with studied
indifference to the learned dissertation delivered by Albert,
after the manner of Pliny and Calpurnius, touching the
iron-pointed nets used to prevent the ferocious beasts from
springing on the spectators. Franz let him proceed without
interruption, and, in fact, did not hear what was said; he
longed to be alone, and free to ponder over all that had
occurred. One of the two men, whose mysterious meeting in
the Colosseum he had so unintentionally witnessed, was an
entire stranger to him, but not so the other; and though
Franz had been unable to distinguish his features, from his
being either wrapped in his mantle or obscured by the
shadow, the tones of his voice had made too powerful an
impression on him the first time he had heard them for him
ever again to forget them, hear them when or where he
might. It was more especially when this man was speaking
in a manner half jesting, half bitter, that Franz's ear recalled
most vividly the deep sonorous, yet well-pitched voice that
had addressed him in the grotto of Monte Cristo, and which
he heard for the second time amid the darkness and ruined
grandeur of the Colosseum. And the more he thought, the
more entire was his conviction, that the person who wore the
mantle was no other than his former host and entertainer,
"Sinbad the Sailor."

"Have a care how far you pledge yourself, my good friend,
Under any other circumstances, Franz would have found it
for I may remind you of your promise at some, perhaps, not
impossible to resist his extreme curiosity to know more of so
very distant period, when I, in my turn, may require your
singular a personage, and with that intent have sought to
aid and influence."
renew their short acquaintance; but in the present instance,
"Let that day come sooner or later, your excellency will find the confidential nature of the conversation he had overheard
me what I have found you in this my heavy trouble; and if made him, with propriety, judge that his appearance at such
from the other end of the world you but write me word to do a time would be anything but agreeable. As we have seen,
such or such a thing, you may regard it as done, for done it therefore, he permitted his former host to retire without
shall be, on the word and faith of" -attempting a recognition, but fully promising himself a rich
indemnity for his present forbearance should chance afford
"Hush!" interrupted the stranger; "I hear a noise."
him another opportunity. In vain did Franz endeavor to
"'Tis some travellers, who are visiting the Colosseum by forget the many perplexing thoughts which assailed him; in
torchlight."
vain did he court the refreshment of sleep. Slumber refused
"'Twere better we should not be seen together; those guides to visit his eyelids and the night was passed in feverish
are nothing but spies, and might possibly recognize you; and, contemplation of the chain of circumstances tending to
however I may be honored by your friendship, my worthy prove the identity of the mysterious visitant to the
friend, if once the extent of our intimacy were known, I am Colosseum with the inhabitant of the grotto of Monte Cristo;
sadly afraid both my reputation and credit would suffer and the more he thought, the firmer grew his opinion on the
subject. Worn out at length, he fell asleep at daybreak, and
thereby."
did not awake till late. Like a genuine Frenchman, Albert
"Well, then, if you obtain the reprieve?"
had employed his time in arranging for the evening's
"The middle window at the Cafe Rospoli will be hung with diversion; he had sent to engage a box at the Teatro
white damask, bearing a red cross."
Argentino; and Franz, having a number of letters to write,
relinquished the carriage to Albert for the whole of the day.
"And if you fail?"
At five o'clock Albert returned, delighted with his day's
"Then all three windows will have yellow draperies."
work; he had been occupied in leaving his letters of
introduction, and had received in return more invitations to
"And then?"
balls and routs than it would be possible for him to accept;
"And then, my good fellow, use your daggers in any way besides this, he had seen (as he called it) all the remarkable
you please, and I further promise you to be there as a sights at Rome. Yes, in a single day he had accomplished
spectator of your prowess."
what his more serious-minded companion would have taken
"We understand each other perfectly, then. Adieu, your weeks to effect. Neither had he neglected to ascertain the
name of the piece to be played that night at the Teatro
excellency; depend upon me as firmly as I do upon you."
Argentino, and also what performers appeared in it.
Saying these words, the Transteverin disappeared down the
staircase, while his companion, muffling his features more The opera of "Parisina" was announced for representation,
closely than before in the folds of his mantle, passed almost and the principal actors were Coselli, Moriani, and La
close to Franz, and descended to the arena by an outward Specchia. The young men, therefore, had reason to consider
flight of steps. The next minute Franz heard himself called themselves fortunate in having the opportunity of hearing
by Albert, who made the lofty building re-echo with the one of the best works by the composer of "Lucia di
sound of his friend's name. Franz, however, did not obey the Lammermoor," supported by three of the most renowned
vocalists of Italy. Albert had never been able to endure
133


CHAPTER 34


THE COLOSSEUM

the Italian theatres, with their orchestras from which it is
impossible to see, and the absence of balconies, or open
boxes; all these defects pressed hard on a man who had had
his stall at the Bouffes, and had shared a lower box at the
Opera. Still, in spite of this, Albert displayed his most
dazzling and effective costumes each time he visited the
theatres; but, alas, his elegant toilet was wholly thrown away,
and one of the most worthy representatives of Parisian
fashion had to carry with him the mortifying reflection that
he had nearly overrun Italy without meeting with a single
adventure.

These united considerations made Albert more lively and
anxious to please than he had hitherto been. Totally
disregarding the business of the stage, he leaned from his
box and began attentively scrutinizing the beauty of each
pretty woman, aided by a powerful opera-glass; but, alas,
this attempt to attract notice wholly failed; not even curiosity
had been excited, and it was but too apparent that the lovely
creatures, into whose good graces he was desirous of
stealing, were all so much engrossed with themselves, their
lovers, or their own thoughts, that they had not so much as
noticed him or the manipulation of his glass.

Sometimes Albert would affect to make a joke of his want of
success; but internally he was deeply wounded, and his
self-love immensely piqued, to think that Albert de Morcerf,
the most admired and most sought after of any young
person of his day, should thus be passed over, and merely
have his labor for his pains. And the thing was so much the
more annoying, as, according to the characteristic modesty
of a Frenchman, Albert had quitted Paris with the full
conviction that he had only to show himself in Italy to carry
all before him, and that upon his return he should astonish
the Parisian world with the recital of his numerous
love-affairs. Alas, poor Albert! none of those interesting
adventures fell in his way; the lovely Genoese, Florentines,
and Neapolitans were all faithful, if not to their husbands, at
least to their lovers, and thought not of changing even for
the splendid appearance of Albert de Morcerf; and all he
gained was the painful conviction that the ladies of Italy
have this advantage over those of France, that they are
faithful even in their infidelity. Yet he could not restrain a
hope that in Italy, as elsewhere, there might be an exception
to the general rule. Albert, besides being an elegant,
well-looking young man, was also possessed of considerable
talent and ability; moreover, he was a viscount -- a recently
created one, certainly, but in the present day it is not
necessary to go as far back as Noah in tracing a descent, and
a genealogical tree is equally estimated, whether dated from
1399 or merely 1815; but to crown all these advantages,
Albert de Morcerf commanded an income of 50,000 livres, a
more than sufficient sum to render him a personage of
considerable importance in Paris. It was therefore no small
mortification to him to have visited most of the principal
cities in Italy without having excited the most trifling
observation. Albert, however, hoped to indemnify himself
for all these slights and indifferences during the Carnival,
knowing full well that among the different states and
kingdoms in which this festivity is celebrated, Rome is the
spot where even the wisest and gravest throw off the usual
rigidity of their lives, and deign to mingle in the follies of
this time of liberty and relaxation.

The truth was, that the anticipated pleasures of the Carnival,
with the "holy week" that was to succeed it, so filled every
fair breast, as to prevent the least attention being bestowed
even on the business of the stage. The actors made their
entries and exits unobserved or unthought of; at certain
conventional moments, the spectators would suddenly cease
their conversation, or rouse themselves from their musings,
to listen to some brilliant effort of Moriani's, a well-executed
recitative by Coselli, or to join in loud applause at the
wonderful powers of La Specchia; but that momentary
excitement over, they quickly relapsed into their former state
of preoccupation or interesting conversation. Towards the
close of the first act, the door of a box which had been
hitherto vacant was opened; a lady entered to whom Franz
had been introduced in Paris, where indeed, he had
imagined she still was. The quick eye of Albert caught the
involuntary start with which his friend beheld the new
arrival, and, turning to him, he said hastily, "Do you know
the woman who has just entered that box?"

The Carnival was to commence on the morrow; therefore
Albert had not an instant to lose in setting forth the
programme of his hopes, expectations, and claims to notice.
With this design he had engaged a box in the most
conspicuous part of the theatre, and exerted himself to set off
his personal attractions by the aid of the most rich and
elaborate toilet. The box taken by Albert was in the first
circle; although each of the three tiers of boxes is deemed
equally aristocratic, and is, for this reason, generally styled
the "nobility's boxes," and although the box engaged for the
two friends was sufficiently capacious to contain at least a
dozen persons, it had cost less than would be paid at some of
the French theatres for one admitting merely four occupants.
Another motive had influenced Albert's selection of his seat,
-- who knew but that, thus advantageously placed, he might
not in truth attract the notice of some fair Roman, and an
introduction might ensue that would procure him the offer
of a seat in a carriage, or a place in a princely balcony, from
which he might behold the gayeties of the Carnival?
134

"Yes; what do you think of her?"
"Oh, she is perfectly lovely -- what a complexion! And such
magnificent hair! Is she French?"
"No; a Venetian."
"And her name is -- "
"Countess G---- ."
"Ah, I know her by name!" exclaimed Albert; "she is said to
possess as much wit and cleverness as beauty. I was to have
been presented to her when I met her at Madame Villefort's
ball."
"Shall I assist you in repairing your negligence?" asked
Franz.
"My dear fellow, are you really on such good terms with her
as to venture to take me to her box?"
"Why, I have only had the honor of being in her society and
conversing with her three or four times in my life; but you
know that even such an acquaintance as that might warrant
my doing what you ask." At that instant, the countess
perceived Franz, and graciously waved her hand to him, to
which he replied by a respectful inclination of the head.
"Upon my word," said Albert, "you seem to be on excellent
terms with the beautiful countess."
"You are mistaken in thinking so," returned Franz calmly;
"but you merely fall into the same error which leads so many
of our countrymen to commit the most egregious blunders,
-- I mean that of judging the habits and customs of Italy and
Spain by our Parisian notions; believe me, nothing is more
fallacious than to form any estimate of the degree of
intimacy you may suppose existing among persons by the
familiar terms they seem upon; there is a similarity of feeling
at this instant between ourselves and the countess -- nothing
more."
"Is there, indeed, my good fellow? Pray tell me, is it
sympathy of heart?"

"No; of taste," continued Franz gravely.
"And in what manner has this congeniality of mind been
evinced?"
"By the countess's visiting the Colosseum, as we did last
night, by moonlight, and nearly alone."
"You were with her, then?"
"I was."
"And what did you say to her?"
"Oh, we talked of the illustrious dead of whom that
magnificent ruin is a glorious monument!"
"Upon my word," cried Albert, "you must have been a very
entertaining companion alone, or all but alone, with a
beautiful woman in such a place of sentiment as the
Colosseum, and yet to find nothing better to talk about than
the dead! All I can say is, if ever I should get such a chance,
the living should be my theme."
"And you will probably find your theme ill-chosen."
"But," said Albert, breaking in upon his discourse, "never
mind the past; let us only remember the present. Are you not
going to keep your promise of introducing me to the fair
subject of our remarks?"
"Certainly, directly the curtain falls on the stage."
"What a confounded time this first act takes. I believe, on my
soul, that they never mean to finish it."
"Oh, yes, they will; only listen to that charming finale. How
exquisitely Coselli sings his part."
"But what an awkward, inelegant fellow he is."
"Well, then, what do you say to La Specchia? Did you ever
see anything more perfect than her acting?"

the truth, for in Paris and the circle in which the viscount
moved, he was looked upon and cited as a model of
perfection. Franz added that his companion, deeply grieved
at having been prevented the honor of being presented to the
countess during her sojourn in Paris, was most anxious to
make up for it, and had requested him (Franz) to remedy the
past misfortune by conducting him to her box, and
concluded by asking pardon for his presumption in having
taken it upon himself to do so. The countess, in reply, bowed
gracefully to Albert, and extended her hand with cordial
kindness to Franz; then, inviting Albert to take the vacant
seat beside her, she recommended Franz to take the next best,
if he wished to view the ballet, and pointed to the one
behind her own chair. Albert was soon deeply engrossed in
discoursing upon Paris and Parisian matters, speaking to the
countess of the various persons they both knew there. Franz
perceived how completely he was in his element; and,
unwilling to interfere with the pleasure he so evidently felt,
took up Albert's glass, and began in his turn to survey the
audience. Sitting alone, in the front of a box immediately
opposite, but situated on the third row, was a woman of
exquisite beauty, dressed in a Greek costume, which
evidently, from the ease and grace with which she wore it,
was her national attire. Behind her, but in deep shadow, was
the outline of a masculine figure; but the features of this
latter personage it was not possible to distinguish. Franz
could not forbear breaking in upon the apparently
interesting conversation passing between the countess and
Albert, to inquire of the former if she knew who was the fair
Albanian opposite, since beauty such as hers was well
worthy of being observed by either sex. "All I can tell about
her," replied the countess, "is, that she has been at Rome
since the beginning of the season; for I saw her where she
now sits the very first night of the season, and since then she
has never missed a performance. Sometimes she is
accompanied by the person who is now with her, and at
others she is merely attended by a black servant."

"Why, you know, my dear fellow, when one has been
accustomed to Malibran and Sontag, such singers as these
don't make the same impression on you they perhaps do on "And what do you think of her personal appearance?"
others."
"Oh, I consider her perfectly lovely -- she is just my idea of
"At least, you must admire Moriani's style and execution."
what Medora must have been."

"I never fancied men of his dark, ponderous appearance Franz and the countess exchanged a smile, and then the
singing with a voice like a woman's."
latter resumed her conversation with Albert, while Franz
"My good friend," said Franz, turning to him, while Albert returned to his previous survey of the house and company.
continued to point his glass at every box in the theatre, "you The curtain rose on the ballet, which was one of those
seem determined not to approve; you are really too difficult excellent specimens of the Italian school, admirably arranged
to please." The curtain at length fell on the performances, to and put on the stage by Henri, who has established for
the infinite satisfaction of the Viscount of Morcerf, who himself a great reputation throughout Italy for his taste and
seized his hat, rapidly passed his fingers through his hair, skill in the choregraphic art -- one of those masterly
arranged his cravat and wristbands, and signified to Franz productions of grace, method, and elegance in which the
that he was waiting for him to lead the way. Franz, who had whole corps de ballet, from the principal dancers to the
mutely interrogated the countess, and received from her a humblest supernumerary, are all engaged on the stage at the
gracious smile in token that he would be welcome, sought same time; and a hundred and fifty persons may be seen
not to retard the gratification of Albert's eager impatience, exhibiting the same attitude, or elevating the same arm or
but began at once the tour of the house, closely followed by leg with a simultaneous movement, that would lead you to
Albert, who availed himself of the few minutes required to suppose that but one mind, one act of volition, influenced
reach the opposite side of the theatre to settle the height and the moving mass -- the ballet was called "Poliska." However
smoothness of his collar, and to arrange the lappets of his much the ballet might have claimed his attention, Franz was
coat. This important task was just completed as they arrived too deeply occupied with the beautiful Greek to take any
at the countess's box. At the knock, the door was note of it; while she seemed to experience an almost childlike
immediately opened, and the young man who was seated delight in watching it, her eager, animated looks contrasting
beside the countess, in obedience to the Italian custom, strongly with the utter indifference of her companion, who,
instantly rose and surrendered his place to the strangers, during the whole time the piece lasted, never even moved,
who, in turn, would be expected to retire upon the arrival of not even when the furious, crashing din produced by the
trumpets, cymbals, and Chinese bells sounded their loudest
other visitors.
from the orchestra. Of this he took no heed, but was, as far as
Franz presented Albert as one of the most distinguished appearances might be trusted, enjoying soft repose and
young men of the day, both as regarded his position in bright celestial dreams. The ballet at length came to a close,
society and extraordinary talents; nor did he say more than and the curtain fell amid the loud, unanimous plaudits of an
135


CHAPTER 34


THE COLOSSEUM

enthusiastic and delighted audience.

a corpse permitted by some friendly grave-digger to quit his
tomb for a while, and revisit this earth of ours, than anything
Owing to the very judicious plan of dividing the two acts of
human. How ghastly pale he is!"
the opera with a ballet, the pauses between the performances
are very short, the singers in the opera having time to repose "Oh, he is always as colorless as you now see him," said
themselves and change their costume, when necessary, while Franz.
the dancers are executing their pirouettes and exhibiting
"Then you know him?" almost screamed the countess. "Oh,
their graceful steps. The overture to the second act began;
pray do, for heaven's sake, tell us all about -- is he a vampire,
and, at the first sound of the leader's bow across his violin,
or a resuscitated corpse, or what?"
Franz observed the sleeper slowly arise and approach the
Greek girl, who turned around to say a few words to him, "I fancy I have seen him before; and I even think he
and then, leaning forward again on the railing of her box, recognizes me."
she became as absorbed as before in what was going on. The "And I can well understand," said the countess, shrugging
countenance of the person who had addressed her remained up her beautiful shoulders, as though an involuntary
so completely in the shade, that, though Franz tried his shudder passed through her veins, "that those who have
utmost, he could not distinguish a single feature. The curtain once seen that man will never be likely to forget him." The
rose, and the attention of Franz was attracted by the actors; sensation experienced by Franz was evidently not peculiar to
and his eyes turned from the box containing the Greek girl himself; another, and wholly uninterested person, felt the
and her strange companion to watch the business of the same unaccountable awe and misgiving. "Well." inquired
stage.
Franz, after the countess had a second time directed her
Most of my readers are aware that the second act of
"Parisina" opens with the celebrated and effective duet in
which Parisina, while sleeping, betrays to Azzo the secret of
her love for Ugo. The injured husband goes through all the
emotions of jealousy, until conviction seizes on his mind,
and then, in a frenzy of rage and indignation, he awakens his
guilty wife to tell her that he knows her guilt and to threaten
her with his vengeance. This duet is one of the most
beautiful, expressive and terrible conceptions that has ever
emanated from the fruitful pen of Donizetti. Franz now
listened to it for the third time; yet it's notes, so tenderly
expressive and fearfully grand as the wretched husband and
wife give vent to their different griefs and passions, thrilled
through the soul of Franz with an effect equal to his first
emotions upon hearing it. Excited beyond his usual calm
demeanor, Franz rose with the audience, and was about to
join the loud, enthusiastic applause that followed; but
suddenly his purpose was arrested, his hands fell by his
sides, and the half-uttered "bravos" expired on his lips. The
occupant of the box in which the Greek girl sat appeared to
share the universal admiration that prevailed; for he left his
seat to stand up in front, so that, his countenance being fully
revealed, Franz had no difficulty in recognizing him as the
mysterious inhabitant of Monte Cristo, and the very same
person he had encountered the preceding evening in the
ruins of the Colosseum, and whose voice and figure had
seemed so familiar to him. All doubt of his identity was now
at an end; his singular host evidently resided at Rome. The
surprise and agitation occasioned by this full confirmation of
Franz's former suspicion had no doubt imparted a
corresponding expression to his features; for the countess,
after gazing with a puzzled look at his face, burst into a fit of
laughter, and begged to know what had happened.
"Countess," returned Franz, totally unheeding her raillery, "I
asked you a short time since if you knew any particulars
respecting the Albanian lady opposite; I must now beseech
you to inform me who and what is her husband?"

lorgnette at the box, "what do you think of our opposite
neighbor?"
"Why, that he is no other than Lord Ruthven himself in a
living form." This fresh allusion to Byron* drew a smile to
Franz's countenance; although he could but allow that if
anything was likely to induce belief in the existence of
vampires, it would be the presence of such a man as the
mysterious personage before him.
"I must positively find out who and what he is," said Franz,
rising from his seat.
"No, no," cried the countess; "you must not leave me. I
depend upon you to escort me home. Oh, indeed, I cannot
permit you to go."
* Scott, of course: "The son of an ill-fated sire, and the father
of a yet more unfortunate family, bore in his looks that cast
of inauspicious melancholy by which the physiognomists of
that time pretended to distinguish those who were
predestined to a violent and unhappy death." -- The Abbot,
ch. xxii.
"Is it possible," whispered Franz, "that you entertain any
fear?"

"I'll tell you," answered the countess. "Byron had the most
perfect belief in the existence of vampires, and even assured
me that he had seen them. The description he gave me
perfectly corresponds with the features and character of the
man before us. Oh, he is the exact personification of what I
have been led to expect! The coal-black hair, large bright,
glittering eyes, in which a wild, unearthly fire seems burning,
-- the same ghastly paleness. Then observe, too, that the
woman with him is altogether unlike all others of her sex.
She is a foreigner -- a stranger. Nobody knows who she is, or
where she comes from. No doubt she belongs to the same
horrible race he does, and is, like himself, a dealer in magical
arts. I entreat of you not to go near him -- at least to-night;
and if to-morrow your curiosity still continues as great,
"Nay," answered the countess, "I know no more of him than pursue your researches if you will; but to-night you neither
can nor shall. For that purpose I mean to keep you all to
yourself."
myself." Franz protested he could not defer his pursuit till
"Perhaps you never before noticed him?"
the following day, for many reasons. "Listen to me," said the
"What a question -- so truly French! Do you not know that countess, "and do not be so very headstrong. I am going
we Italians have eyes only for the man we love?"
home. I have a party at my house to-night, and therefore
cannot possibly remain till the end of the opera. Now, I
"True," replied Franz.
cannot for one instant believe you so devoid of gallantry as
"All I call say is," continued the countess, taking up the to refuse a lady your escort when she even condescends to
lorgnette, and directing it toward the box in question, "that ask you for it."
the gentleman, whose history I am unable to furnish, seems
to me as though he had just been dug up; he looks more like There was nothing else left for Franz to do but to take up his
hat, open the door of the box, and offer the countess his arm.
136

It was quite evident, by her manner, that her uneasiness was
not feigned; and Franz himself could not resist a feeling of
superstitious dread -- so much the stronger in him, as it
arose from a variety of corroborative recollections, while the
terror of the countess sprang from an instinctive belief,
originally created in her mind by the wild tales she had
listened to till she believed them truths. Franz could even
feel her arm tremble as he assisted her into the carriage.
Upon arriving at her hotel, Franz perceived that she had
deceived him when she spoke of expecting company; on the
contrary, her own return before the appointed hour seemed
greatly to astonish the servants. "Excuse my little
subterfuge," said the countess, in reply to her companion's
half-reproachful observation on the subject; "but that horrid
man had made me feel quite uncomfortable, and I longed to
be alone, that I might compose my startled mind." Franz
essayed to smile. "Nay," said she, "do not smile; it ill accords
with the expression of your countenance, and I am sure it
does not spring from your heart. however, promise me one
thing."
"What is it?"
"Promise me, I say."

conceal. Besides, you must have perceived that the countess
was really alarmed."
"At what? At the sight of that respectable gentleman sitting
opposite to us in the same box with the lovely Greek girl?
Now, for my part, I met them in the lobby after the
conclusion of the piece; and hang me, if I can guess where
you took your notions of the other world from. I can assure
you that this hobgoblin of yours is a deuced fine-looking
fellow -- admirably dressed. Indeed, I feel quite sure, from
the cut of his clothes, they are made by a first-rate Paris tailor
-- probably Blin or Humann. He was rather too pale,
certainly; but then, you know, paleness is always looked
upon as a strong proof of aristocratic descent and
distinguished breeding." Franz smiled; for he well
remembered that Albert particularly prided himself on the
entire absence of color in his own complexion.
"Well, that tends to confirm my own ideas," said Franz, "that
the countess's suspicions were destitute alike of sense and
reason. Did he speak in your hearing? and did you catch any
of his words?"

"I did; but they were uttered in the Romaic dialect. I knew
"I will do anything you desire, except relinquish my
that from the mixture of Greek words. I don't know whether
determination of finding out who this man is. I have more
I ever told you that when I was at college I was rather -reasons than you can imagine for desiring to know who he is,
rather strong in Greek."
from whence he came, and whither he is going."
"He spoke the Romaic language, did he?"
"Where he comes from I am ignorant; but I can readily tell
you where he is going to, and that is down below, without "I think so."
the least doubt."
"That settles it," murmured Franz. "'Tis he, past all doubt."
"Let us only speak of the promise you wished me to make,"
said Franz.
"Well, then, you must give me your word to return
immediately to your hotel, and make no attempt to follow
this man to-night. There are certain affinities between the
persons we quit and those we meet afterwards. For heaven's
sake, do not serve as a conductor between that man and me.
Pursue your chase after him to-morrow as eagerly as you
please; but never bring him near me, if you would not see
me die of terror. And now, good-night; go to your rooms,
and try to sleep away all recollections of this evening. For
my own part, I am quite sure I shall not be able to close my
eyes." So saying, the countess quitted Franz, leaving him
unable to decide whether she were merely amusing herself
at his expense, or whether her fears and agitations were
genuine.

"What do you say?"
"Nothing, nothing. But tell me, what were you thinking
about when I came in?"
"Oh, I was arranging a little surprise for you."
"Indeed. Of what nature?"
"Why, you know it is quite impossible to procure a carriage."
"Certainly; and I also know that we have done all that
human means afforded to endeavor to get one."
"Now, then, in this difficulty a bright idea has flashed across
my brain." Franz looked at Albert as though he had not
much confidence in the suggestions of his imagination. "I tell
you what, Sir Franz," cried Albert, "you deserve to be called
out for such a misgiving and incredulous glance as that you
were pleased to bestow on me just now."

Upon his return to the hotel, Franz found Albert in his
dressing-gown and slippers, listlessly extended on a sofa,
smoking a cigar. "My dear fellow." cried he, springing up, "is
it really you? Why, I did not expect to see you before
to-morrow."

"And I promise to give you the satisfaction of a gentleman if
your scheme turns out as ingenious as you assert."

"My dear Albert," replied Franz, "I am glad of this
opportunity to tell you, once and forever, that you entertain
a most erroneous notion concerning Italian women. I should
have thought the continual failures you have met with in all
your own love affairs might have taught you better by this
time."

"You agree, do you not, that obtaining a carriage is out of the
question?"

"Upon my soul, these women would puzzle the very Devil
to read them aright. Why, here -- they give you their hand -they press yours in return -- they keep up a whispering
conversation -- permit you to accompany them home. Why,
if a Parisian were to indulge in a quarter of these marks of
flattering attention, her reputation would be gone forever."

"Well, then, hearken to me."
"I listen."

"I do."
"Neither can we procure horses?"
"True; we have offered any sum, but have failed."
"Well, now, what do you say to a cart? I dare say such a
thing might be had."
"Very possibly."
"And a pair of oxen?"

"As easily found as the cart."
"And the very reason why the women of this fine country
put so little restraint on their words and actions, is because "Then you see, my good fellow, with a cart and a couple of
they live so much in public, and have really nothing to oxen our business can be managed. The cart must be
tastefully ornamented; and if you and I dress ourselves as
137


CHAPTER 34


THE COLOSSEUM

Neapolitan reapers, we may get up a striking tableau, after
the manner of that splendid picture by Leopold Robert. It
would add greatly to the effect if the countess would join us
in the costume of a peasant from Puzzoli or Sorrento. Our
group would then be quite complete, more especially as the
countess is quite beautiful enough to represent a madonna."
"Well," said Franz, "this time, Albert, I am bound to give you
credit for having hit upon a most capital idea."
"And quite a national one, too," replied Albert with gratified
pride. "A mere masque borrowed from our own festivities.
Ha, ha, ye Romans! you thought to make us, unhappy
strangers, trot at the heels of your processions, like so many
lazzaroni, because no carriages or horses are to be had in
your beggarly city. But you don't know us; when we can't
have one thing we invent another."
"And have you communicated your triumphant idea to
anybody?"
"Only to our host. Upon my return home I sent for him, and I
then explained to him what I wished to procure. He assured
me that nothing would be easier than to furnish all I desired.
One thing I was sorry for; when I bade him have the horns of
the oxen gilded, he told me there would not be time, as it
would require three days to do that; so you see we must do
without this little superfluity."
"And where is he now?"
"Who?"
"Our host."

Maltese or Sicilian I cannot exactly say; but this I know, that
he is noble as a Borghese and rich as a gold-mine."
"It seems to me," said Franz, speaking in an undertone to
Albert, "that if this person merited the high panegyrics of
our landlord, he would have conveyed his invitation
through another channel, and not permitted it to be brought
to us in this unceremonious way. He would have written -or" -At this instant some one knocked at the door. "Come in,"
said Franz. A servant, wearing a livery of considerable style
and richness, appeared at the threshold, and, placing two
cards in the landlord's hands, who forthwith presented them
to the two young men, he said, "Please to deliver these, from
the Count of Monte Cristo to Viscomte Albert de Morcerf
and M. Franz d'Epinay. The Count of Monte Cristo,"
continued the servant, "begs these gentlemen's permission to
wait upon them as their neighbor, and he will be honored by
an intimation of what time they will please to receive him."
"Faith, Franz," whispered Albert, "there is not much to find
fault with here."
"Tell the count," replied Franz, "that we will do ourselves the
pleasure of calling on him." The servant bowed and retired.
"That is what I call an elegant mode of attack," said Albert,
"You were quite correct in what you said, Signor Pastrini.
The Count of Monte Cristo is unquestionably a man of
first-rate breeding and knowledge of the world."
"Then you accept his offer?" said the host.

"Of course we do," replied Albert. "Still, I must own I am
"Gone out in search of our equipage, by to-morrow it might
sorry to be obliged to give up the cart and the group of
be too late."
reapers -- it would have produced such an effect! And were
"Then he will be able to give us an answer to-night."
it not for the windows at the Palazzo Rospoli, by way of
"Oh, I expect him every minute." At this instant the door recompense for the loss of our beautiful scheme, I don't
opened, and the head of Signor Pastrini appeared. know but what I should have held on by my original plan.
What say you, Franz?"
"Permesso?" inquired he.
"Oh, I agree with you; the windows in the Palazzo Rospoli
alone decided me." The truth was, that the mention of two
"Now, then," asked Albert eagerly, "have you found the places in the Palazzo Rospoli had recalled to Franz the
desired cart and oxen?"
conversation he had overheard the preceding evening in the
"Better than that!" replied Signor Pastrini, with the air of a ruins of the Colosseum between the mysterious unknown
and the Transteverin, in which the stranger in the cloak had
man perfectly well satisfied with himself.
undertaken to obtain the freedom of a condemned criminal;
"Take care, my worthy host," said Albert, "better is a sure
and if this muffled-up individual proved (as Franz felt sure
enemy to well."
he would) the same as the person he had just seen in the
"Let your excellencies only leave the matter to me," returned Teatro Argentino, then he should be able to establish his
Signor Pastrini in a tone indicative of unbounded identity, and also to prosecute his researches respecting him
self-confidence.
with perfect facility and freedom. Franz passed the night in
"But what have you done?" asked Franz. "Speak out, there's a confused dreams respecting the two meetings he had
already had with his mysterious tormentor, and in waking
worthy fellow."
speculations as to what the morrow would produce. The
"Your excellencies are aware," responded the landlord, next day must clear up every doubt; and unless his near
swelling with importance, "that the Count of Monte Cristo is neighbor and would-be friend, the Count of Monte Cristo,
living on the same floor with yourselves!"
possessed the ring of Gyges, and by its power was able to
"I should think we did know it," exclaimed Albert, "since it is render himself invisible, it was very certain he could not
owing to that circumstance that we are packed into these escape this time. Eight o'clock found Franz up and dressed,
small rooms, like two poor students in the back streets of while Albert, who had not the same motives for early rising,
was still soundly asleep. The first act of Franz was to
Paris."
summon his landlord, who presented himself with his
"When, then, the Count of Monte Cristo, hearing of the
accustomed obsequiousness.
dilemma in which you are placed, has sent to offer you seats
in his carriage and two places at his windows in the Palazzo "Pray, Signor Pastrini," asked Franz, "is not some execution
Rospoli." The friends looked at each other with unutterable appointed to take place to-day?"
surprise.
"Yes, your excellency; but if your reason for inquiry is that
"Certainly -- certainly," cried Franz. "Come in, mine host."

"But do you think," asked Albert, "that we ought to accept
such offers from a perfect stranger?"

you may procure a window to view it from, you are much
too late."

"What sort of person is this Count of Monte Cristo?" asked
Franz of his host. "A very great nobleman, but whether
138

"Oh, no," answered Franz, "I had no such intention; and even
if I had felt a wish to witness the spectacle, I might have

done so from Monte Pincio -- could I not?"
"Ah!" exclaimed mine host, "I did not think it likely your
excellency would have chosen to mingle with such a rabble
as are always collected on that hill, which, indeed, they
consider as exclusively belonging to themselves."
"Very possibly I may not go," answered Franz; "but in case I
feel disposed, give me some particulars of to-day's
executions."
"What particulars would your excellency like to hear?"
"Why, the number of persons condemned to suffer, their
names, and description of the death they are to die."
"That happens just lucky, your excellency! Only a few
minutes ago they brought me the tavolettas."
"What are they?"
"Sort of wooden tablets hung up at the corners of streets the
evening before an execution, on which is pasted up a paper
containing the names of the condemned persons, their
crimes, and mode of punishment. The reason for so publicly
announcing all this is, that all good and faithful Catholics
may offer up their prayers for the unfortunate culprits, and,
above all, beseech of heaven to grant them a sincere
repentance."
"And these tablets are brought to you that you may add your
prayers to those of the faithful, are they?" asked Franz
somewhat incredulously.
"Oh, dear, no, your excellency! I have not time for anybody's
affairs but my own and those of my honorable guests; but I
make an agreement with the man who pastes up the papers,
and he brings them to me as he would the playbills, that in
case any person staying at my hotel should like to witness an
execution, he may obtain every requisite information
concerning the time and place etc."

in the ruins of the Colosseum. No part of the programme
differed, -- the names of the condemned persons, their
crimes, and mode of punishment, all agreed with his
previous information. In all probability, therefore, the
Transteverin was no other than the bandit Luigi Vampa
himself, and the man shrouded in the mantle the same he
had known as "Sinbad the Sailor," but who, no doubt, was
still pursuing his philanthropic expedition in Rome, as he
had already done at Porto-Vecchio and Tunis. Time was
getting on, however, and Franz deemed it advisable to
awaken Albert; but at the moment he prepared to proceed to
his chamber, his friend entered the room in perfect costume
for the day. The anticipated delights of the Carnival had so
run in his head as to make him leave his pillow long before
his usual hour. "Now, my excellent Signor Pastrini," said
Franz, addressing his landlord, "since we are both ready, do
you think we may proceed at once to visit the Count of
Monte Cristo?"
"Most assuredly," replied he. "The Count of Monte Cristo is
always an early riser; and I can answer for his having been
up these two hours."
"Then you really consider we shall not be intruding if we
pay our respects to him directly?"
"Oh, I am quite sure. I will take all the blame on myself if
you find I have led you into an error."
"Well, then, if it be so, are you ready, Albert?"
"Perfectly."
"Let us go and return our best thanks for his courtesy."
"Yes, let us do so." The landlord preceded the friends across
the landing, which was all that separated them from the
apartments of the count, rang at the bell, and, upon the door
being opened by a servant, said, "I signori Francesi."

The domestic bowed respectfully, and invited them to enter.
They passed through two rooms, furnished in a luxurious
manner they had not expected to see under the roof of
"Why, your excellency," returned the landlord, chuckling Signor Pastrini, and were shown into an elegantly fitted-up
and rubbing his hands with infinite complacency, "I think I drawing-room. The richest Turkey carpets covered the floor,
may take upon myself to say I neglect nothing to deserve the and the softest and most inviting couches, easy-chairs, and
support and patronage of the noble visitors to this poor sofas, offered their high-piled and yielding cushions to such
as desired repose or refreshment. Splendid paintings by the
hotel."
first masters were ranged against the walls, intermingled
"I see that plainly enough, my most excellent host, and you with magnificent trophies of war, while heavy curtains of
may rely upon me to proclaim so striking a proof of your costly tapestry were suspended before the different doors of
attention to your guests wherever I go. Meanwhile, oblige the room. "If your excellencies will please to be seated," said
me by a sight of one of these tavolettas."
the man, "I will let the count know that you are here."
"Nothing can be easier than to comply with your excellency's And with these words he disappeared behind one of the
wish," said the landlord, opening the door of the chamber; "I tapestried portieres. As the door opened, the sound of a
have caused one to be placed on the landing, close by your guzla reached the ears of the young men, but was almost
apartment." Then, taking the tablet from the wall, he handed immediately lost, for the rapid closing of the door merely
it to Franz, who read as follows: -allowed one rich swell of harmony to enter. Franz and Albert
"Upon my word, that is a most delicate attention on your
part, Signor Pastrini," cried Franz.

"`The public is informed that on Wednesday, February 23d,
being the first day of the Carnival, executions will take place
in the Piazza del Popolo, by order of the Tribunal of the Rota,
of two persons, named Andrea Rondola, and Peppino,
otherwise called Rocca Priori; the former found guilty of the
murder of a venerable and exemplary priest, named Don
Cesare Torlini, canon of the church of St. John Lateran; and
the latter convicted of being an accomplice of the atrocious
and sanguinary bandit, Luigi Vampa, and his band. The
first-named malefactor will be subjected to the mazzuola, the
second culprit beheaded. The prayers of all good Christians
are entreated for these unfortunate men, that it may please
God to awaken them to a sense of their guilt, and to grant
them a hearty and sincere repentance for their crimes.'"
This was precisely what Franz had heard the evening before

looked inquiringly at each other, then at the gorgeous
furnishings of the apartment. Everything seemed more
magnificent at a second view than it had done at their first
rapid survey.
"Well," said Franz to his friend, "what think you of all this?"
"Why, upon my soul, my dear fellow, it strikes me that our
elegant and attentive neighbor must either be some
successful stock-jobber who has speculated in the fall of the
Spanish funds, or some prince travelling incog."
"Hush, hush!" replied Franz; "we shall ascertain who and
what he is -- he comes!" As Franz spoke, he heard the sound
of a door turning on its hinges, and almost immediately
afterwards the tapestry was drawn aside, and the owner of
all these riches stood before the two young men. Albert
139


CHAPTER 34


THE COLOSSEUM

instantly rose to meet him, but Franz remained, in a manner, the Colosseum, and the occupant of the box at the Teatro
spellbound on his chair; for in the person of him who had Argentino, but also his extraordinary host of Monte Cristo.
just entered he recognized not only the mysterious visitant to

140


Chapter 35

"G

entlemen," said the Count of Monte Cristo as he
entered, "I pray you excuse me for suffering my visit
to be anticipated; but I feared to disturb you by presenting
myself earlier at your apartments; besides, you sent me word
that you would come to me, and I have held myself at your
disposal."

La Mazzolata
"And your excellency has one, which was let to Prince
Lobanieff; but I was obliged to pay a hundred" --

"That will do -- that will do, Monsieur Bertuccio; spare these
gentlemen all such domestic arrangements. You have the
window, that is sufficient. Give orders to the coachman; and
be in readiness on the stairs to conduct us to it." The steward
"Franz and I have to thank you a thousand times, count," bowed, and was about to quit the room. "Ah," continued the
returned Albert; "you extricated us from a great dilemma, count, "be good enough to ask Pastrini if he has received the
and we were on the point of inventing a very fantastic tavoletta, and if he can send us an account of the execution."
vehicle when your friendly invitation reached us."
"There is no need to do that," said Franz, taking out his
"Indeed," returned the count, motioning the two young men tablets; "for I saw the account, and copied it down."
to sit down. "It was the fault of that blockhead Pastrini, that I
"Very well, you can retire, M. Bertuccio; but let us know
did not sooner assist you in your distress. He did not
when breakfast is ready. These gentlemen," added he,
mention a syllable of your embarrassment to me, when he
turning to the two friends, "will, I trust, do me the honor to
knows that, alone and isolated as I am, I seek every
breakfast with me?"
opportunity of making the acquaintance of my neighbors. As
soon as I learned I could in any way assist you, I most "But, my dear count," said Albert, "we shall abuse your
eagerly seized the opportunity of offering my services." The kindness."
two young men bowed. Franz had, as yet, found nothing to "Not at all; on the contrary, you will give me great pleasure.
say; he had come to no determination, and as nothing in the You will, one or other of you, perhaps both, return it to me at
count's manner manifested the wish that he should Paris. M. Bertuccio, lay covers for three." He then took
recognize him, he did not know whether to make any Franz's tablets out of his hand. "`We announce,' he read, in
allusion to the past, or wait until he had more proof; besides, the same tone with which he would have read a newspaper,
although sure it was he who had been in the box the `that to-day, the 23d of February, will be executed Andrea
previous evening, he could not be equally positive that this Rondolo, guilty of murder on the person of the respected
was the man he had seen at the Colosseum. He resolved, and venerated Don Cesare Torlini, canon of the church of St.
therefore, to let things take their course without making any John Lateran, and Peppino, called Rocca Priori, convicted of
direct overture to the count. Moreover, he had this complicity with the detestable bandit Luigi Vampa, and the
advantage, he was master of the count's secret, while the men of his band.' Hum! `The first will be mazzolato, the
count had no hold on Franz, who had nothing to conceal. second decapitato.' Yes," continued the count, "it was at first
However, he resolved to lead the conversation to a subject arranged in this way; but I think since yesterday some
which might possibly clear up his doubts.
change has taken place in the order of the ceremony."
"Count," said he, "you have offered us places in your "Really?" said Franz.
carriage, and at your windows in the Rospoli Palace. Can
you tell us where we can obtain a sight of the Piazza del "Yes, I passed the evening at the Cardinal Rospigliosi's, and
there mention was made of something like a pardon for one
Popolo?"
of the two men."
"Ah," said the count negligently, looking attentively at
Morcerf, "is there not something like an execution upon the "For Andrea Rondolo?" asked Franz.
Piazza del Popolo?"
"No," replied the count, carelessly; "for the other (he glanced
"Yes," returned Franz, finding that the count was coming to at the tablets as if to recall the name), for Peppino, called
Rocca Priori. You are thus deprived of seeing a man
the point he wished.
guillotined; but the mazzuola still remains, which is a very
"Stay, I think I told my steward yesterday to attend to this; curious punishment when seen for the first time, and even
perhaps I can render you this slight service also." He the second, while the other, as you must know, is very
extended his hand, and rang the bell thrice. "Did you ever simple. The mandaia* never fails, never trembles, never
occupy yourself," said he to Franz, "with the employment of strikes thirty times ineffectually, like the soldier who
time and the means of simplifying the summoning your beheaded the Count of Chalais, and to whose tender mercy
servants? I have. When I ring once, it is for my valet; twice, Richelieu had doubtless recommended the sufferer. Ah,"
for my majordomo; thrice, for my steward, -- thus I do not added the count, in a contemptuous tone, "do not tell me of
waste a minute or a word. Here he is." A man of about European punishments, they are in the infancy, or rather the
forty-five or fifty entered, exactly resembling the smuggler old age, of cruelty."
who had introduced Franz into the cavern; but he did not
appear to recognize him. It was evident he had his orders. * Guillotine.
"Monsieur Bertuccio," said the count, "you have procured me "Really, count," replied Franz, "one would think that you had
windows looking on the Piazza del Popolo, as I ordered you studied the different tortures of all the nations of the world."
yesterday "
"There are, at least, few that I have not seen," said the count
"Yes, excellency," returned the steward; "but it was very coldly.
late."
"And you took pleasure in beholding these dreadful
"Did I not tell you I wished for one?" replied the count, spectacles?"
frowning.
"My first sentiment was horror, the second indifference, the
141


CHAPTER 35


LA MAZZOLATA

third curiosity."

would give back the same, were it possible; an eye for an eye,
a tooth for a tooth, as the Orientalists say, -- our masters in
"Curiosity -- that is a terrible word."
everything, -- those favored creatures who have formed for
"Why so? In life, our greatest preoccupation is death; is it not themselves a life of dreams and a paradise of realities."
then, curious to study the different ways by which the soul
"But," said Franz to the count, "with this theory, which
and body can part; and how, according to their different
renders you at once judge and executioner of your own
characters, temperaments, and even the different customs of
cause, it would be difficult to adopt a course that would
their countries, different persons bear the transition from life
forever prevent your falling under the power of the law.
to death, from existence to annihilation? As for myself, I can
Hatred is blind, rage carries you away; and he who pours
assure you of one thing, -- the more men you see die, the
out vengeance runs the risk of tasting a bitter draught."
easier it becomes to die yourself; and in my opinion, death
may be a torture, but it is not an expiation."
"Yes, if he be poor and inexperienced, not if he be rich and
skilful; besides, the worst that could happen to him would
"I do not quite understand you," replied Franz; "pray explain
be the punishment of which we have already spoken, and
your meaning, for you excite my curiosity to the highest
which the philanthropic French Revolution has substituted
pitch."
for being torn to pieces by horses or broken on the wheel.
"Listen," said the count, and deep hatred mounted to his face, What matters this punishment, as long as he is avenged? On
as the blood would to the face of any other. "If a man had by my word, I almost regret that in all probability this miserable
unheard-of and excruciating tortures destroyed your father, Peppino will not be beheaded, as you might have had an
your mother, your betrothed, -- a being who, when torn from opportunity then of seeing how short a time the punishment
you, left a desolation, a wound that never closes, in your lasts, and whether it is worth even mentioning; but, really
breast, -- do you think the reparation that society gives you this is a most singular conversation for the Carnival,
is sufficient when it interposes the knife of the guillotine gentlemen; how did it arise? Ah, I recollect, you asked for a
between the base of the occiput and the trapezal muscles of place at my window; you shall have it; but let us first sit
the murderer, and allows him who has caused us years of down to table, for here comes the servant to inform us that
moral sufferings to escape with a few moments of physical breakfast is ready." As he spoke, a servant opened one of the
pain?"
four doors of the apartment, saying -- "Al suo commodo!"
"Yes, I know," said Franz, "that human justice is insufficient The two young men arose and entered the breakfast-room.
to console us; she can give blood in return for blood, that is During the meal, which was excellent, and admirably served,
all; but you must demand from her only what it is in her Franz looked repeatedly at Albert, in order to observe the
power to grant."
impressions which he doubted not had been made on him
"I will put another case to you," continued the count; "that by the words of their entertainer; but whether with his usual
where society, attacked by the death of a person, avenges carelessness he had paid but little attention to him, whether
death by death. But are there not a thousand tortures by the explanation of the Count of Monte Cristo with regard to
which a man may be made to suffer without society taking duelling had satisfied him, or whether the events which
the least cognizance of them, or offering him even the Franz knew of had had their effect on him alone, he
insufficient means of vengeance, of which we have just remarked that his companion did not pay the least regard to
spoken? Are there not crimes for which the impalement of them, but on the contrary ate like a man who for the last four
the Turks, the augers of the Persians, the stake and the brand or five months had been condemned to partake of Italian
of the Iroquois Indians, are inadequate tortures, and which cookery -- that is, the worst in the world. As for the count, he
are unpunished by society? Answer me, do not these crimes just touched the dishes; he seemed to fulfil the duties of a
host by sitting down with his guests, and awaited their
exist?"
departure to be served with some strange or more delicate
"Yes," answered Franz; "and it is to punish them that food. This brought back to Franz, in spite of himself, the
duelling is tolerated."
recollection of the terror with which the count had inspired
"Ah, duelling," cried the count; "a pleasant manner, upon my the Countess G---- , and her firm conviction that the man in
soul, of arriving at your end when that end is vengeance! A the opposite box was a vampire. At the end of the breakfast
man has carried off your mistress, a man has seduced your Franz took out his watch. "Well," said the count, "what are
wife, a man has dishonored your daughter; he has rendered you doing?"
the whole life of one who had the right to expect from "You must excuse us, count," returned Franz, "but we have
heaven that portion of happiness God his promised to every still much to do."
one of his creatures, an existence of misery and infamy; and
you think you are avenged because you send a ball through "What may that be?"
the head, or pass a sword through the breast, of that man "We have no masks, and it is absolutely necessary to procure
who has planted madness in your brain, and despair in your them."
heart. And remember, moreover, that it is often he who
"Do not concern yourself about that; we have, I think, a
comes off victorious from the strife, absolved of all crime in
private room in the Piazza del Popolo; I will have whatever
the eyes of the world. No, no," continued the count, "had I to
costumes you choose brought to us, and you can dress
avenge myself, it is not thus I would take revenge."
there."
"Then you disapprove of duelling? You would not fight a
"After the execution?" cried Franz.
duel?" asked Albert in his turn, astonished at this strange
theory.
"Before or after, whichever you please."
"Oh, yes," replied the count; "understand me, I would fight a
duel for a trifle, for an insult, for a blow; and the more so
that, thanks to my skill in all bodily exercises, and the
indifference to danger I have gradually acquired, I should be
almost certain to kill my man. Oh, I would fight for such a
cause; but in return for a slow, profound, eternal torture, I
142

"Opposite the scaffold?"
"The scaffold forms part of the fete."
"Count, I have reflected on the matter," said Franz, "I thank
you for your courtesy, but I shall content myself with
accepting a place in your carriage and at your window at the

Rospoli Palace, and I leave you at liberty to dispose of my
place at the Piazza del Popolo."

and moreover," added he, sending a volume of smoke up
towards the ceiling, "that he has excellent cigars." Such was
Albert's opinion of the count, and as Franz well knew that
"But I warn you, you will lose a very curious sight," returned
Albert professed never to form an opinion except upon long
the count.
reflection, he made no attempt to change it. "But," said he,
"You will describe it to me," replied Franz, "and the recital "did you observe one very singular thing?"
from your lips will make as great an impression on me as if I
"What?"
had witnessed it. I have more than once intended witnessing
an execution, but I have never been able to make up my "How attentively he looked at you."
mind; and you, Albert?"
"At me?"
"I," replied the viscount, -- "I saw Castaing executed, but I
"Yes." -- Albert reflected. "Ah," replied he, sighing, "that is
think I was rather intoxicated that day, for I had quitted
not very surprising; I have been more than a year absent
college the same morning, and we had passed the previous
from Paris, and my clothes are of a most antiquated cut; the
night at a tavern."
count takes me for a provincial. The first opportunity you
"Besides, it is no reason because you have not seen an have, undeceive him, I beg, and tell him I am nothing of the
execution at Paris, that you should not see one anywhere kind." Franz smiled; an instant after the count entered.
else; when you travel, it is to see everything. Think what a
"I am now quite at your service, gentlemen," said he. "The
figure you will make when you are asked, `How do they
carriage is going one way to the Piazza del Popolo, and we
execute at Rome?' and you reply, `I do not know'! And,
will go another; and, if you please, by the Corso. Take some
besides, they say that the culprit is an infamous scoundrel,
more of these cigars, M. de Morcerf."
who killed with a log of wood a worthy canon who had
brought him up like his own son. Diable, when a churchman "With all my heart," returned Albert; "Italian cigars are
is killed, it should be with a different weapon than a log, horrible. When you come to Paris, I will return all this."
especially when he has behaved like a father. If you went to "I will not refuse; I intend going there soon, and since you
Spain, would you not see the bull-fight? Well, suppose it is a allow me, I will pay you a visit. Come, we have not any time
bull-fight you are going to see? Recollect the ancient Romans to lose, it is half-past twelve -- let us set off." All three
of the Circus, and the sports where they killed three hundred descended; the coachman received his master's orders, and
lions and a hundred men. Think of the eighty thousand drove down the Via del Babuino. While the three gentlemen
applauding spectators, the sage matrons who took their walked along the Piazza de Spagni and the Via Frattina,
daughters, and the charming Vestals who made with the which led directly between the Fiano and Rospoli palaces,
thumb of their white hands the fatal sign that said, `Come, Franz's attention was directed towards the windows of that
despatch the dying.'"
last palace, for he had not forgotten the signal agreed upon
"Shall you go, then, Albert?" asked Franz.
"Ma foi, yes; like you, I hesitated, but the count's eloquence
decides me."
"Let us go, then," said Franz, "since you wish it; but on our
way to the Piazza del Popolo, I wish to pass through the
Corso. Is this possible, count?"
"On foot, yes, in a carriage, no."
"I will go on foot, then."
"Is it important that you should go that way?"
"Yes, there is something I wish to see."
"Well, we will go by the Corso. We will send the carriage to
wait for us on the Piazza del Popolo, by the Strada del
Babuino, for I shall be glad to pass, myself, through the
Corso, to see if some orders I have given have been
executed."
"Excellency," said a servant, opening the door, "a man in the
dress of a penitent wishes to speak to you."
"Ah, yes" returned the count, "I know who he is, gentlemen;
will you return to the salon? you will find good cigars on the
centre table. I will be with you directly." The young men rose
and returned into the salon, while the count, again
apologizing, left by another door. Albert, who was a great
smoker, and who had considered it no small sacrifice to be
deprived of the cigars of the Cafe de Paris, approached the
table, and uttered a cry of joy at perceiving some veritable
puros.
"Well," asked Franz, "what think you of the Count of Monte
Cristo?"
"What do I think?" said Albert, evidently surprised at such a
question from his companion; "I think he is a delightful
fellow, who does the honors of his table admirably; who has
travelled much, read much, is, like Brutus, of the Stoic school,

between the man in the mantle and the Transtevere peasant.
"Which are your windows?" asked he of the count, with as
much indifference as he could assume. "The three last,"
returned he, with a negligence evidently unaffected, for he
could not imagine with what intention the question was put.
Franz glanced rapidly towards the three windows. The side
windows were hung with yellow damask, and the centre one
with white damask and a red cross. The man in the mantle
had kept his promise to the Transteverin, and there could
now be no doubt that he was the count. The three windows
were still untenanted. Preparations were making on every
side; chairs were placed, scaffolds were raised, and windows
were hung with flags. The masks could not appear; the
carriages could not move about; but the masks were visible
behind the windows, the carriages, and the doors.
Franz, Albert, and the count continued to descend the Corso.
As they approached the Piazza del Popolo, the crowd
became more dense, and above the heads of the multitude
two objects were visible: the obelisk, surmounted by a cross,
which marks the centre of the square, and in front of the
obelisk, at the point where the three streets, del Babuino, del
Corso, and di Ripetta, meet, the two uprights of the scaffold,
between which glittered the curved knife of the mandaia. At
the corner of the street they met the count's steward, who
was awaiting his master. The window, let at an exorbitant
price, which the count had doubtless wished to conceal from
his guests, was on the second floor of the great palace,
situated between the Via del Babuino and the Monte Pincio.
It consisted, as we have said, of a small dressing-room,
opening into a bedroom, and, when the door of
communication was shut, the inmates were quite alone. On
chairs were laid elegant masquerade costumes of blue and
white satin. "As you left the choice of your costumes to me,"
said the count to the two friends, "I have had these brought,
as they will be the most worn this year; and they are most
suitable, on account of the confetti (sweetmeats), as they do
143


CHAPTER 35

not show the flour."
Franz heard the words of the count but imperfectly, and he
perhaps did not fully appreciate this new attention to their
wishes; for he was wholly absorbed by the spectacle that the
Piazza del Popolo presented, and by the terrible instrument
that was in the centre. It was the first time Franz had ever
seen a guillotine, -- we say guillotine, because the Roman
mandaia is formed on almost the same model as the French
instrument.* The knife, which is shaped like a crescent, that
cuts with the convex side, falls from a less height, and that is
all the difference. Two men, seated on the movable plank on
which the victim is laid, were eating their breakfasts, while
waiting for the criminal. Their repast consisted apparently of
bread and sausages. One of them lifted the plank, took out a
flask of wine, drank some, and then passed it to his
companion. These two men were the executioner's assistants.
At this sight Franz felt the perspiration start forth upon his
brow. The prisoners, transported the previous evening from
the Carcere Nuovo to the little church of Santa Maria del
Popolo, had passed the night, each accompanied by two
priests, in a chapel closed by a grating, before which were
two sentinels, who were relieved at intervals. A double line
of carbineers, placed on each side of the door of the church,
reached to the scaffold, and formed a circle around it,
leaving a path about ten feet wide, and around the guillotine
a space of nearly a hundred feet. All the rest of the square
was paved with heads. Many women held their infants on
their shoulders, and thus the children had the best view. The
Monte Pincio seemed a vast amphitheatre filled with
spectators; the balconies of the two churches at the corner of
the Via del Babuino and the Via di Ripetta were crammed;
the steps even seemed a parti-colored sea, that was impelled
towards the portico; every niche in the wall held its living
statue. What the count said was true -- the most curious
spectacle in life is that of death. And yet, instead of the
silence and the solemnity demanded by the occasion,
laughter and jests arose from the crowd. It was evident that
the execution was, in the eyes of the people, only the
commencement of the Carnival. Suddenly the tumult ceased,
as if by magic, and the doors of the church opened. A
brotherhood of penitents, clothed from head to foot in robes
of gray sackcloth, with holes for the eyes, and holding in
their hands lighted tapers, appeared first; the chief marched
at the head. Behind the penitents came a man of vast stature
and proportions. He was naked, with the exception of cloth
drawers at the left side of which hung a large knife in a
sheath, and he bore on his right shoulder a heavy iron
sledge-hammer. This man was the executioner. He had,
moreover, sandals bound on his feet by cords. Behind the
executioner came, in the order in which they were to die,
first Peppino and then Andrea. Each was accompanied by
two priests. Neither had his eyes bandaged. Peppino walked
with a firm step, doubtless aware of what awaited him.
Andrea was supported by two priests. Each of them, from
time to time, kissed the crucifix a confessor held out to them.
At this sight alone Franz felt his legs tremble under him. He
looked at Albert -- he was as white as his shirt, and
mechanically cast away his cigar, although he had not half
smoked it. The count alone seemed unmoved -- nay, more, a
slight color seemed striving to rise in his pale cheeks. His
nostrils dilated like those of a wild beast that scents its prey,
and his lips, half opened, disclosed his white teeth, small and
sharp like those of a jackal. And yet his features wore an
expression of smiling tenderness, such as Franz had never
before witnessed in them; his black eyes especially were full
of kindness and pity. However, the two culprits advanced,
and as they approached their faces became visible. Peppino
was a handsome young man of four or five and twenty,
bronzed by the sun; he carried his head erect, and seemed on
144

LA MAZZOLATA
the watch to see on which side his liberator would appear.
Andrea was short and fat; his visage, marked with brutal
cruelty, did not indicate age; he might be thirty. In prison he
had suffered his beard to grow; his head fell on his shoulder,
his legs bent beneath him, and his movements were
apparently automatic and unconscious.
* Dr. Guillotin got the idea of his famous machine from
witnessing an execution in Italy.
"I thought," said Franz to the count, "that you told me there
would be but one execution."
"I told you true," replied he coldly.
"And yet here are two culprits."
"Yes; but only one of these two is about to die; the other has
many years to live."
"If the pardon is to come, there is no time to lose."
"And see, here it is," said the count. At the moment when
Peppino reached the foot of the mandaia, a priest arrived in
some haste, forced his way through the soldiers, and,
advancing to the chief of the brotherhood, gave him a folded
paper. The piercing eye of Peppino had noticed all. The chief
took the paper, unfolded it, and, raising his hand, "Heaven
be praised, and his holiness also," said he in a loud voice;
"here is a pardon for one of the prisoners!"
"A pardon!" cried the people with one voice -- "a pardon!" At
this cry Andrea raised his head. "Pardon for whom?" cried
he.
Peppino remained breathless. "A pardon for Peppino, called
Rocca Priori," said the principal friar. And he passed the
paper to the officer commanding the carbineers, who read
and returned it to him.
"For Peppino!" cried Andrea, who seemed roused from the
torpor in which he had been plunged. "Why for him and not
for me? We ought to die together. I was promised he should
die with me. You have no right to put me to death alone. I
will not die alone -- I will not!" And he broke from the priests
struggling and raving like a wild beast, and striving
desperately to break the cords that bound his hands. The
executioner made a sign, and his two assistants leaped from
the scaffold and seized him. "What is going on?" asked Franz
of the count; for, as all the talk was in the Roman dialect, he
had not perfectly understood it. "Do you not see?" returned
the count, "that this human creature who is about to die is
furious that his fellow-sufferer does not perish with him?
and, were he able, he would rather tear him to pieces with
his teeth and nails than let him enjoy the life he himself is
about to be deprived of. Oh, man, man -- race of crocodiles,"
cried the count, extending his clinched hands towards the
crowd, "how well do I recognize you there, and that at all
times you are worthy of yourselves!" Meanwhile Andrea and
the two executioners were struggling on the ground, and he
kept exclaiming, "He ought to die! -- he shall die! -- I will not
die alone!"
"Look, look," cried the count. seizing the young men's hands
-- "look, for on my soul it is curious. Here is a man who had
resigned himself to his fate, who was going to the scaffold to
die -- like a coward, it is true, but he was about to die
without resistance. Do you know what gave him strength? -do you know what consoled him? It was, that another
partook of his punishment -- that another partook of his
anguish -- that another was to die before him. Lead two
sheep to the butcher's, two oxen to the slaughterhouse, and
make one of them understand that his companion will not
die; the sheep will bleat for pleasure, the ox will bellow with
joy. But man -- man, whom God created in his own image -man, upon whom God has laid his first, his sole

commandment, to love his neighbor -- man, to whom God
has given a voice to express his thoughts -- what is his first
cry when he hears his fellow-man is saved? A blasphemy.
Honor to man, this masterpiece of nature, this king of the
creation!" And the count burst into a laugh; a terrible laugh,
that showed he must have suffered horribly to be able thus
to laugh. However, the struggle still continued, and it was
dreadful to witness. The people all took part against Andrea,
and twenty thousand voices cried, "Put him to death! put
him to death!" Franz sprang back, but the count seized his
arm, and held him before the window. "What are you
doing?" said he. "Do you pity him? If you heard the cry of
`Mad dog!' you would take your gun -- you would
unhesitatingly shoot the poor beast, who, after all, was only
guilty of having been bitten by another dog. And yet you
pity a man who, without being bitten by one of his race, has
yet murdered his benefactor; and who, now unable to kill
any one, because his hands are bound, wishes to see his
companion in captivity perish. No, no -- look, look!"

The command was needless. Franz was fascinated by the
horribly spectacle. The two assistants had borne Andrea to
the scaffold, and there, in spite of his struggles, his bites, and
his cries, had forced him to his knees. During this time the
executioner had raised his mace, and signed to them to get
out of the way; the criminal strove to rise, but, ere he had
time, the mace fell on his left temple. A dull and heavy
sound was heard, and the man dropped like an ox on his
face, and then turned over on his back. The executioner let
fall his mace, drew his knife, and with one stroke opened his
throat, and mounting on his stomach, stamped violently on
it with his feet. At every stroke a jet of blood sprang from the
wound.
This time Franz could contain himself no longer, but sank,
half fainting, into a seat. Albert, with his eyes closed, was
standing grasping the window-curtains. The count was erect
and triumphant, like the Avenging Angel!G

145


CHAPTER 36


Chapter 36

THE CARNIVAL AT ROME

The Carnival At Rome

W

hen Franz recovered his senses, he saw Albert
drinking a glass of water, of which, to judge from his
pallor, he stood in great need; and the count, who was
assuming his masquerade costume. He glanced
mechanically towards the square -- the scene was wholly
changed; scaffold, executioners, victims, all had disappeared;
only the people remained, full of noise and excitement. The
bell of Monte Citorio, which only sounds on the pope's
decease and the opening of the Carnival, was ringing a
joyous peal. "Well," asked he of the count, "what has, then,
happened?"

took offence, or did anything but laugh. Franz and Albert
were like men who, to drive away a violent sorrow, have
recourse to wine, and who, as they drink and become
intoxicated, feel a thick veil drawn between the past and the
present. They saw, or rather continued to see, the image of
what they had witnessed; but little by little the general
vertigo seized them, and they felt themselves obliged to take
part in the noise and confusion. A handful of confetti that
came from a neighboring carriage, and which, while it
covered Morcerf and his two companions with dust, pricked
his neck and that portion of his face uncovered by his mask
like a hundred pins, incited him to join in the general combat,
"Nothing," replied the count; "only, as you see, the Carnival
in which all the masks around him were engaged. He rose in
his commenced. Make haste and dress yourself."
his turn, and seizing handfuls of confetti and sweetmeats,
"In fact," said Franz, "this horrible scene has passed away with which the carriage was filled, cast them with all the
like a dream."
force and skill he was master of.
"It is but a dream, a nightmare, that has disturbed you."
"Yes, that I have suffered; but the culprit?"
"That is a dream also; only he has remained asleep, while
you have awakened; and who knows which of you is the
most fortunate?"
"But Peppino -- what has become of him?"
"Peppino is a lad of sense, who, unlike most men, who are
happy in proportion as they are noticed, was delighted to see
that the general attention was directed towards his
companion. He profited by this distraction to slip away
among the crowd, without even thanking the worthy priests
who accompanied him. Decidedly man is an ungrateful and
egotistical animal. But dress yourself; see, M. de Morcerf sets
you the example." Albert was drawing on the satin
pantaloon over his black trousers and varnished boots. "Well,
Albert," said Franz, "do you feel much inclined to join the
revels? Come, answer frankly."
"Ma foi, no," returned Albert. "But I am really glad to have
seen such a sight; and I understand what the count said -that when you have once habituated yourself to a similar
spectacle, it is the only one that causes you any emotion."

The strife had fairly begun, and the recollection of what they
had seen half an hour before was gradually effaced from the
young men's minds, so much were they occupied by the gay
and glittering procession they now beheld. As for the Count
of Monte Cristo, he had never for an instant shown any
appearance of having been moved. Imagine the large and
splendid Corso, bordered from one end to the other with
lofty palaces, with their balconies hung with carpets, and
their windows with flags. At these balconies are three
hundred thousand spectators -- Romans, Italians, strangers
from all parts of the world, the united aristocracy of birth,
wealth, and genius. Lovely women, yielding to the influence
of the scene, bend over their balconies, or lean from their
windows, and shower down confetti, which are returned by
bouquets; the air seems darkened with the falling confetti
and flying flowers. In the streets the lively crowd is dressed
in the most fantastic costumes -- gigantic cabbages walk
gravely about, buffaloes' heads below from men's shoulders,
dogs walk on their hind legs; in the midst of all this a mask is
lifted, and, as in Callot's Temptation of St. Anthony, a lovely
face is exhibited, which we would fain follow, but from
which we are separated by troops of fiends. This will give a
faint idea of the Carnival at Rome. At the second turn the
Count stopped the carriage, and requested permission to
withdraw, leaving the vehicle at their disposal. Franz looked
up -- they were opposite the Rospoli Palace. At the centre
window, the one hung with white damask with a red cross,
was a blue domino, beneath which Franz's imagination
easily pictured the beautiful Greek of the Argentina.
"Gentlemen," said the count, springing out, "when you are
tired of being actors, and wish to become spectators of this
scene, you know you have places at my windows. In the
meantime, dispose of my coachman, my carriage, and my
servants." We have forgotten to mention, that the count's
coachman was attired in a bear-skin, exactly resembling
Odry's in "The Bear and the Pasha;" and the two footmen
behind were dressed up as green monkeys, with spring
masks, with which they made grimaces at every one who
passed. Franz thanked the count for his attention. As for
Albert, he was busily occupied throwing bouquets at a
carriage full of Roman peasants that was passing near him.
Unfortunately for him, the line of carriages moved on again,
and while he descended the Piazza del Popolo, the other
ascended towards the Palazzo di Venezia. "Ah, my dear
fellow," said he to Franz; "you did not see?"

"Without reflecting that this is the only moment in which
you can study character," said the count; "on the steps of the
scaffold death tears off the mask that has been worn through
life, and the real visage is disclosed. It must be allowed that
Andrea was not very handsome, the hideous scoundrel!
Come, dress yourselves, gentlemen, dress yourselves." Franz
felt it would be ridiculous not to follow his two companions'
example. He assumed his costume, and fastened on the mask
that scarcely equalled the pallor of his own face. Their toilet
finished, they descended; the carriage awaited them at the
door, filled with sweetmeats and bouquets. They fell into the
line of carriages. It is difficult to form an idea of the perfect
change that had taken place. Instead of the spectacle of
gloomy and silent death, the Piazza del Popolo presented a
spectacle of gay and noisy mirth and revelry. A crowd of
masks flowed in from all sides, emerging from the doors,
descending from the windows. From every street and every
corner drove carriages filled with clowns, harlequins,
dominoes, mummers, pantomimists, Transteverins, knights,
and peasants, screaming, fighting, gesticulating, throwing
eggs filled with flour, confetti, nosegays, attacking, with
their sarcasms and their missiles, friends and foes,
companions and strangers, indiscriminately, and no one "What?"
146

"There, -- that calash filled with Roman peasants."
"No."
"Well, I am convinced they are all charming women."

projects to put into execution before going to the theatre; and
instead of making any answer, he inquired if Signor Pastrini
could procure him a tailor. "A tailor," said the host; "and for
what?"

"How unfortunate that you were masked, Albert," said Franz; "To make us between now and to-morrow two Roman
"here was an opportunity of making up for past peasant costumes," returned Albert. The host shook his head.
disappointments."
"To make you two costumes between now and to-morrow? I
"Oh," replied he, half laughing, half serious; "I hope the ask your excellencies' pardon, but this is quite a French
Carnival will not pass without some amends in one shape or demand; for the next week you will not find a single tailor
who would consent to sew six buttons on a waistcoat if you
the other."
paid him a crown a piece for each button."
But, in spite of Albert's hope, the day passed unmarked by
any incident, excepting two or three encounters with the "Then I must give up the idea?"
carriage full of Roman peasants. At one of these encounters,
accidentally or purposely, Albert's mask fell off. He instantly
rose and cast the remainder of the bouquets into the carriage.
Doubtless one of the charming females Albert had detected
beneath their coquettish disguise was touched by his
gallantry; for, as the carriage of the two friends passed her,
she threw a bunch of violets. Albert seized it, and as Franz
had no reason to suppose it was meant for him, he suffered
Albert to retain it. Albert placed it in his button-hole, and the
carriage went triumphantly on.

"No; we have them ready-made. Leave all to me; and
to-morrow, when you awake, you shall find a collection of
costumes with which you will be satisfied."
"My dear Albert," said Franz, "leave all to our host; he has
already proved himself full of resources; let us dine quietly,
and afterwards go and see `The Algerian Captive.'"

"Agreed," returned Albert; "but remember, Signor Pastrini,
that both my friend and myself attach the greatest
importance to having to-morrow the costumes we have
asked for." The host again assured them they might rely on
"Well," said Franz to him; "there is the beginning of an
him, and that their wishes should be attended to; upon
adventure."
which Franz and Albert mounted to their apartments, and
"Laugh if you please -- I really think so. So I will not proceeded to disencumber themselves of their costumes.
abandon this bouquet."
Albert, as he took off his dress, carefully preserved the
"Pardieu," returned Franz, laughing, "in token of your bunch of violets; it was his token reserved for the morrow.
ingratitude." The jest, however, soon appeared to become The two friends sat down to table; but they could not refrain
earnest; for when Albert and Franz again encountered the from remarking the difference between the Count of Monte
carriage with the contadini, the one who had thrown the Cristo's table and that of Signor Pastrini. Truth compelled
violets to Albert, clapped her hands when she beheld them Franz, in spite of the dislike he seemed to have taken to the
in his button-hole. "Bravo, bravo," said Franz; "things go count, to confess that the advantage was not on Pastrini's
wonderfully. Shall I leave you? Perhaps you would prefer side. During dessert, the servant inquired at what time they
wished for the carriage. Albert and Franz looked at each
being alone?"
other, fearing really to abuse the count's kindness. The
"No," replied he; "I will not be caught like a fool at a first servant understood them. "His excellency the Count of
disclosure by a rendezvous under the clock, as they say at Monte Cristo had," he said, "given positive orders that the
the opera-balls. If the fair peasant wishes to carry matters carriage was to remain at their lordships' orders all day, and
any further, we shall find her, or rather, she will find us they could therefore dispose of it without fear of
to-morrow; then she will give me some sign or other, and I indiscretion."
shall know what I have to do."
They resolved to profit by the count's courtesy, and ordered
"On my word," said Franz, "you are wise as Nestor and the horses to be harnessed, while they substituted evening
prudent as Ulysses, and your fair Circe must be very skilful dress for that which they had on, and which was somewhat
or very powerful if she succeed in changing you into a beast the worse for the numerous combats they had sustained.
of any kind." Albert was right; the fair unknown had This precaution taken, they went to the theatre, and installed
resolved, doubtless, to carry the intrigue no farther; for themselves in the count's box. During the first act, the
although the young men made several more turns, they did Countess G---- entered. Her first look was at the box where
not again see the calash, which had turned up one of the she had seen the count the previous evening, so that she
neighboring streets. Then they returned to the Rospoli Palace; perceived Franz and Albert in the place of the very person
but the count and the blue domino had also disappeared; the concerning whom she had expressed so strange an opinion
two windows, hung with yellow damask, were still occupied to Franz. Her opera-glass was so fixedly directed towards
by the persons whom the count had invited. At this moment them, that Franz saw it would be cruel not to satisfy her
the same bell that had proclaimed the beginning of the curiosity; and, availing himself of one of the privileges of the
mascherata sounded the retreat. The file on the Corso broke spectators of the Italian theatres, who use their boxes to hold
the line, and in a second all the carriages had disappeared. receptions, the two friends went to pay their respects to the
Franz and Albert were opposite the Via delle Maratte; the countess. Scarcely had they entered, when she motioned to
coachman, without saying a word, drove up it, passed along Franz to assume the seat of honor. Albert, in his turn, sat
the Piazza di Spagni and the Rospoli Palace and stopped at behind.
the door of the hotel. Signor Pastrini came to the door to
receive his guests. Franz hastened to inquire after the count, "Well," said she, hardly giving Franz time to sit down, "it
and to express regret that he had not returned in sufficient seems you have nothing better to do than to make the
time; but Pastrini reassured him by saying that the Count of acquaintance of this new Lord Ruthven, and you are already
Monte Cristo had ordered a second carriage for himself, and the best friends in the world."
that it had gone at four o'clock to fetch him from the Rospoli "Without being so far advanced as that, my dear countess,"
Palace. The count had, moreover, charged him to offer the returned Franz, "I cannot deny that we have abused his good
two friends the key of his box at the Argentina. Franz nature all day."
questioned Albert as to his intentions; but Albert had great
147


CHAPTER 36


THE CARNIVAL AT ROME

"All day?"
"Yes; this morning we breakfasted with him; we rode in his
carriage all day, and now we have taken possession of his
box."
"You know him, then?"
"Yes, and no."
"How so?"
"It is a long story."
'Tell it to me."
"It would frighten you too much."
"So much the more reason."
"At least wait until the story has a conclusion."
"Very well; I prefer complete histories; but tell me how you
made his acquaintance? Did any one introduce you to him?"
"No; it was he who introduced himself to us."
"When?"
"Last night, after we left you."
"Through what medium?"
"The very prosaic one of our landlord."
"He is staying, then, at the Hotel de Londres with you?"
"Not only in the same hotel, but on the same floor."
"What is his name -- for, of course, you know?"
"The Count of Monte Cristo."
"That is not a family name?"
"No, it is the name of the island he has purchased."
"And he is a count?"
"A Tuscan count."
"Well, we must put up with that," said the countess, who
was herself from one of the oldest Venetian families. "What
sort of a man is he?"
"Ask the Vicomte de Morcerf."
"You hear, M. de Morcerf, I am referred to you," said the
countess.
"We should be very hard to please, madam," returned Albert,
"did we not think him delightful. A friend of ten years'
standing could not have done more for us, or with a more
perfect courtesy."

"Well, did you notice two windows hung with yellow
damask, and one with white damask with a red cross? Those
were the count's windows?"
"Why, he must be a nabob. Do you know what those three
windows were worth?"
"Two or three hundred Roman crowns?"
"Two or three thousand."
"The deuce."
"Does his island produce him such a revenue?"
"It does not bring him a baiocco."
"Then why did he purchase it?"
"For a whim."
"He is an original, then?"
"In reality," observed Albert, "he seemed to me somewhat
eccentric; were he at Paris, and a frequenter of the theatres, I
should say he was a poor devil literally mad. This morning
he made two or three exits worthy of Didier or Anthony." At
this moment a fresh visitor entered, and, according to
custom, Franz gave up his seat to him. This circumstance
had, moreover, the effect of changing the conversation; an
hour afterwards the two friends returned to their hotel.
Signor Pastrini had already set about procuring their
disguises for the morrow; and he assured them that they
would be perfectly satisfied. The next morning, at nine
o'clock, he entered Franz's room, followed by a tailor, who
had eight or ten Roman peasant costumes on his arm; they
selected two exactly alike, and charged the tailor to sew on
each of their hats about twenty yards of ribbon, and to
procure them two of the long silk sashes of different colors
with which the lower orders decorate themselves on
fete-days. Albert was impatient to see how he looked in his
new dress -- a jacket and breeches of blue velvet, silk
stockings with clocks, shoes with buckles, and a silk
waistcoat. This picturesque attire set him off to great
advantage; and when he had bound the scarf around his
waist, and when his hat, placed coquettishly on one side, let
fall on his shoulder a stream of ribbons, Franz was forced to
confess that costume has much to do with the physical
superiority we accord to certain nations. The Turks used to
be so picturesque with their long and flowing robes, but are
they not now hideous with their blue frocks buttoned up to
the chin, and their red caps, which make them look like a
bottle of wine with a red seal? Franz complimented Albert,
who looked at himself in the glass with an unequivocal smile
of satisfaction. They were thus engaged when the Count of
Monte Cristo entered.

"Come," observed the countess, smiling, "I see my vampire is
only some millionaire, who has taken the appearance of Lara
in order to avoid being confounded with M. de Rothschild; "Gentlemen," said he, "although a companion is agreeable,
perfect freedom is sometimes still more agreeable. I come to
and you have seen her?"
say that to-day, and for the remainder of the Carnival, I leave
"Her?"
the carriage entirely at your disposal. The host will tell you I
"The beautiful Greek of yesterday."
have three or four more, so that you will not inconvenience
"No; we heard, I think, the sound of her guzla, but she me in any way. Make use of it, I pray you, for your pleasure
or your business."
remained perfectly invisible."
"When you say invisible," interrupted Albert, "it is only to
keep up the mystery; for whom do you take the blue domino
at the window with the white curtains?"
"Where was this window with white hangings?" asked the
countess.
"At the Rospoli Palace."
"The count had three windows at the Rospoli Palace?"
"Yes. Did you pass through the Corso?"
"Yes."
148

The young men wished to decline, but they could find no
good reason for refusing an offer which was so agreeable to
them. The Count of Monte Cristo remained a quarter of an
hour with them, conversing on all subjects with the greatest
ease. He was, as we have already said, perfectly well
acquainted with the literature of all countries. A glance at the
walls of his salon proved to Franz and Albert that he was a
connoisseur of pictures. A few words he let fall showed
them that he was no stranger to the sciences, and he seemed
much occupied with chemistry. The two friends did not
venture to return the count the breakfast he had given them;

it would have been too absurd to offer him in exchange for
his excellent table the very inferior one of Signor Pastrini.
They told him so frankly, and he received their excuses with
the air of a man who appreciated their delicacy. Albert was
charmed with the count's manners, and he was only
prevented from recognizing him for a perfect gentleman by
reason of his varied knowledge. The permission to do what
he liked with the carriage pleased him above all, for the fair
peasants had appeared in a most elegant carriage the
preceding evening, and Albert was not sorry to be upon an
equal footing with them. At half-past one they descended,
the coachman and footman had put on their livery over their
disguises, which gave them a more ridiculous appearance
than ever, and which gained them the applause of Franz and
Albert. Albert had fastened the faded bunch of violets to his
button-hole. At the first sound of the bell they hastened into
the Corso by the Via Vittoria. At the second turn, a bunch of
fresh violets, thrown from a carriage filled with harlequins,
indicated to Albert that, like himself and his friend, the
peasants had changed their costume, also; and whether it
was the result of chance, or whether a similar feeling had
possessed them both, while he had changed his costume
they had assumed his.
Albert placed the fresh bouquet in his button-hole, but he
kept the faded one in his hand; and when he again met the
calash, he raised it to his lips, an action which seemed
greatly to amuse not only the fair lady who had thrown it,
but her joyous companions also. The day was as gay as the
preceding one, perhaps even more animated and noisy; the
count appeared for an instant at his window. but when they
again passed he had disappeared. It is almost needless to say
that the flirtation between Albert and the fair peasant
continued all day. In the evening, on his return, Franz found
a letter from the embassy, informing him that he would have
the honor of being received by his holiness the next day. At
each previous visit he had made to Rome, he had solicited
and obtained the same favor; and incited as much by a
religious feeling as by gratitude, he was unwilling to quit the
capital of the Christian world without laying his respectful
homage at the feet of one of St. Peter's successors who has
set the rare example of all the virtues. He did not then think
of the Carnival, for in spite of his condescension and
touching kindness, one cannot incline one's self without awe
before the venerable and noble old man called Gregory XVI.
On his return from the Vatican, Franz carefully avoided the
Corso; he brought away with him a treasure of pious
thoughts, to which the mad gayety of the maskers would
have been profanation. At ten minutes past five Albert
entered overjoyed. The harlequin had reassumed her
peasant's costume, and as she passed she raised her mask.
She was charming. Franz congratulated Albert, who received
his congratulations with the air of a man conscious that they
are merited. He had recognized by certain unmistakable
signs, that his fair incognita belonged to the aristocracy. He
had made up his mind to write to her the next day. Franz
remarked, while he gave these details, that Albert seemed to
have something to ask of him, but that he was unwilling to
ask it. He insisted upon it, declaring beforehand that he was
willing to make any sacrifice the other wished. Albert let
himself be pressed just as long as friendship required, and
then avowed to Franz that he would do him a great favor by
allowing him to occupy the carriage alone the next day.
Albert attributed to Franz's absence the extreme kindness of
the fair peasant in raising her mask. Franz was not
sufficiently egotistical to stop Albert in the middle of an
adventure that promised to prove so agreeable to his
curiosity and so flattering to his vanity. He felt assured that
the perfect indiscretion of his friend would duly inform him
of all that happened; and as, during three years that he had

travelled all over Italy, a similar piece of good fortune had
never fallen to his share, Franz was by no means sorry to
learn how to act on such an occasion. He therefore promised
Albert that he would content himself the morrow with
witnessing the Carnival from the windows of the Rospoli
Palace.
The next morning he saw Albert pass and repass, holding an
enormous bouquet, which he doubtless meant to make the
bearer of his amorous epistle. This belief was changed into
certainty when Franz saw the bouquet (conspicuous by a
circle of white camellias) in the hand of a charming
harlequin dressed in rose-colored satin. The evening was no
longer joy, but delirium. Albert nothing doubted but that the
fair unknown would reply in the same manner. Franz
anticipated his wishes by saying that the noise fatigued him,
and that he should pass the next day in writing and looking
over his journal. Albert was not deceived, for the next
evening Franz saw him enter triumphantly shaking a folded
paper which he held by one corner. "Well," said he, "was I
mistaken?"
"She has answered you!" cried Franz.
"Read." This word was pronounced in a manner impossible
to describe. Franz took the letter, and read: -Tuesday evening, at seven o'clock, descend from your
carriage opposite the Via dei Pontefici, and follow the
Roman peasant who snatches your torch from you. When
you arrive at the first step of the church of San Giacomo, be
sure to fasten a knot of rose-colored ribbons to the shoulder
of your harlequin costume, in order that you may be
recognized. Until then you will not see me.
Constancy and Discretion.
"Well," asked he, when Franz had finished, "what do you
think of that?"
"I think that the adventure is assuming a very agreeable
appearance."
"I think so, also," replied Albert; "and I very much fear you
will go alone to the Duke of Bracciano's ball." Franz and
Albert had received that morning an invitation from the
celebrated Roman banker. "Take care, Albert," said Franz.
"All the nobility of Rome will be present, and if your fair
incognita belong to the higher class of society, she must go
there."
"Whether she goes there or not, my opinion is still the same,"
returned Albert. "You have read the letter?"
"Yes."
"You know how imperfectly the women of the mezzo cito
are educated in Italy?" (This is the name of the lower class.)
"Yes."
"Well, read the letter again. Look at the writing, and find if
you can, any blemish in the language or orthography." (The
writing was, in reality, charming, and the orthography
irreproachable.) "You are born to good fortune," said Franz,
as he returned the letter.
"Laugh as much as you will," replied Albert, "I am in love."
"You alarm me," cried Franz. "I see that I shall not only go
alone to the Duke of Bracciano's, but also return to Florence
alone."
"If my unknown be as amiable as she is beautiful," said
Albert, "I shall fix myself at Rome for six weeks, at least. I
adore Rome, and I have always had a great taste for
archaeology."
"Come, two or three more such adventures, and I do not
149


CHAPTER 36


THE CARNIVAL AT ROME

despair of seeing you a member of the Academy." Doubtless
Albert was about to discuss seriously his right to the
academic chair when they were informed that dinner was
ready. Albert's love had not taken away his appetite. He
hastened with Franz to seat himself, free to recommence the
discussion after dinner. After dinner, the Count of Monte
Cristo was announced. They had not seen him for two days.
Signor Pastrini informed them that business had called him
to Civita Vecchia. He had started the previous evening, and
had only returned an hour since. He was charming. Whether
he kept a watch over himself, or whether by accident he did
not sound the acrimonious chords that in other
circumstances had been touched, he was to-night like
everybody else. The man was an enigma to Franz. The count
must feel sure that Franz recognized him; and yet he had not
let fall a single word indicating any previous acquaintance
between them. On his side, however great Franz's desire was
to allude to their former interview, the fear of being
disagreeable to the man who had loaded him and his friend
with kindness prevented him from mentioning it. The count
had learned that the two friends had sent to secure a box at
the Argentina Theatre, and were told they were all let. In
consequence, he brought them the key of his own -- at least
such was the apparent motive of his visit. Franz and Albert
made some difficulty, alleging their fear of depriving him of
it; but the count replied that, as he was going to the Palli
Theatre, the box at the Argentina Theatre would he lost if
they did not profit by it. This assurance determined the two
friends to accept it.
Franz had by degrees become accustomed to the count's
pallor, which had so forcibly struck him at their first meeting.
He could not refrain from admiring the severe beauty of his
features, the only defect, or rather the principal quality of
which was the pallor. Truly, a Byronic hero! Franz could not,
we will not say see him, but even think of him without
imagining his stern head upon Manfred's shoulders, or
beneath Lara's helmet. His forehead was marked with the
line that indicates the constant presence of bitter thoughts;
he had the fiery eyes that seem to penetrate to the very soul,
and the haughty and disdainful upper lip that gives to the
words it utters a peculiar character that impresses them on
the minds of those to whom they are addressed. The count
was no longer young. He was at least forty; and yet it was
easy to understand that he was formed to rule the young
men with whom he associated at present. And, to complete
his resemblance with the fantastic heroes of the English poet,
the count seemed to have the power of fascination. Albert
was constantly expatiating on their good fortune in meeting
such a man. Franz was less enthusiastic; but the count
exercised over him also the ascendency a strong mind
always acquires over a mind less domineering. He thought
several times of the project the count had of visiting Paris;
and he had no doubt but that, with his eccentric character,
his characteristic face, and his colossal fortune, he would
produce a great effect there. And yet he did not wish to be at
Paris when the count was there. The evening passed as
evenings mostly pass at Italian theatres; that is, not in
listening to the music, but in paying visits and conversing.
The Countess G---- wished to revive the subject of the count,
but Franz announced he had something far newer to tell her,
and, in spite of Albert's demonstrations of false modesty, he
informed the countess of the great event which had
preoccupied them for the last three days. As similar intrigues
are not uncommon in Italy, if we may credit travellers, the
comtess did not manifest the least incredulity, but
congratulated Albert on his success. They promised, upon
separating, to meet at the Duke of Bracciano's ball, to which
all Rome was invited. The heroine of the bouquet kept her
word; she gave Albert no sign of her existence the morrow or
150

the day after.
At length Tuesday came, the last and most tumultuous day
of the Carnival. On Tuesday, the theatres open at ten o'clock
in the morning, as Lent begins after eight at night. On
Tuesday, all those who through want of money, time, or
enthusiasm, have not been to see the Carnival before, mingle
in the gayety, and contribute to the noise and excitement.
From two o'clock till five Franz and Albert followed in the
fete, exchanging handfuls of confetti with the other carriages
and the pedestrians, who crowded amongst the horses' feet
and the carriage wheels without a single accident, a single
dispute, or a single fight. The fetes are veritable pleasure
days to the Italians. The author of this history, who has
resided five or six years in Italy, does not recollect to have
ever seen a ceremony interrupted by one of those events so
common in other countries. Albert was triumphant in his
harlequin costume. A knot of rose-colored ribbons fell from
his shoulder almost to the ground. In order that there might
be no confusion, Franz wore his peasant's costume.
As the day advanced, the tumult became greater. There was
not on the pavement, in the carriages, at the windows, a
single tongue that was silent, a single arm that did not move.
It was a human storm, made up of a thunder of cries, and a
hail of sweetmeats, flowers, eggs, oranges, and nosegays. At
three o'clock the sound of fireworks, let off on the Piazza del
Popolo and the Piazza di Venezia (heard with difficulty
amid the din and confusion) announced that the races were
about to begin. The races, like the moccoli, are one of the
episodes peculiar to the last days of the Carnival. At the
sound of the fireworks the carriages instantly broke ranks,
and retired by the adjacent streets. All these evolutions are
executed with an inconceivable address and marvellous
rapidity, without the police interfering in the matter. The
pedestrians ranged themselves against the walls; then the
trampling of horses and the clashing of steel were heard. A
detachment of carbineers, fifteen abreast, galloped up the
Corso in order to clear it for the barberi. When the
detachment arrived at the Piazza di Venezia, a second volley
of fireworks was discharged, to announce that the street was
clear. Almost instantly, in the midst of a tremendous and
general outcry, seven or eight horses, excited by the shouts
of three hundred thousand spectators, passed by like
lightning. Then the Castle of Saint Angelo fired three cannon
to indicate that number three had won. Immediately,
without any other signal, the carriages moved on, flowing on
towards the Corso, down all the streets, like torrents pent up
for a while, which again flow into the parent river; and the
immense stream again continued its course between its two
granite banks.
A new source of noise and movement was added to the
crowd. The sellers of moccoletti entered on the scene. The
moccoli, or moccoletti, are candles which vary in size from
the pascal taper to the rushlight, and which give to each
actor in the great final scene of the Carnival two very serious
problems to grapple with, -- first, how to keep his own
moccoletto alight; and secondly, how to extinguish the
moccoletti of others. The moccoletto is like life: man has
found but one means of transmitting it, and that one comes
from God. But he has discovered a thousand means of taking
it away, and the devil has somewhat aided him. The
moccoletto is kindled by approaching it to a light. But who
can describe the thousand means of extinguishing the
moccoletto? -- the gigantic bellows, the monstrous
extinguishers, the superhuman fans. Every one hastened to
purchase moccoletti -- Franz and Albert among the rest.
The night was rapidly approaching; and already, at the cry
of "Moccoletti!" repeated by the shrill voices of a thousand
vendors, two or three stars began to burn among the crowd.

It was a signal. At the end of ten minutes fifty thousand
lights glittered, descending from the Palazzo di Venezia to
the Piazza del Popolo, and mounting from the Piazzo del
Popolo to the Palazzo di Venezia. It seemed like the fete of
jack-o'-lanterns. It is impossible to form any idea of it
without having seen it. Suppose that all the stars had
descended from the sky and mingled in a wild dance on the
face of the earth; the whole accompanied by cries that were
never heard in any other part of the world. The facchino
follows the prince, the Transteverin the citizen, every one
blowing, extinguishing, relighting. Had old AEolus
appeared at this moment, he would have been proclaimed
king of the moccoli, and Aquilo the heir-presumptive to the
throne. This battle of folly and flame continued for two
hours; the Corso was light as day; the features of the
spectators on the third and fourth stories were visible. Every
five minutes Albert took out his watch; at length it pointed
to seven. The two friends were in the Via dei Pontefici.
Albert sprang out, bearing his moccoletto in his hand. Two
or three masks strove to knock his moccoletto out of his

hand; but Albert, a first-rate pugilist, sent them rolling in the
street, one after the other, and continued his course towards
the church of San Giacomo. The steps were crowded with
masks, who strove to snatch each other's torches. Franz
followed Albert with his eyes, and saw him mount the first
step. Instantly a mask, wearing the well-known costume of a
peasant woman, snatched his moccoletto from him without
his offering any resistance. Franz was too far off to hear what
they said; but, without doubt, nothing hostile passed, for he
saw Albert disappear arm-in-arm with the peasant girl. He
watched them pass through the crowd for some time, but at
length he lost sight of them in the Via Macello. Suddenly the
bell that gives the signal for the end of the carnival sounded,
and at the same instant all the moccoletti were extinguished
as if by enchantment. It seemed as though one immense blast
of the wind had extinguished every one. Franz found
himself in utter darkness. No sound was audible save that of
the carriages that were carrying the maskers home; nothing
was visible save a few lights that burnt behind the windows.
The Carnival was over.

151


CHAPTER 37


Chapter 37

THE CATACOMBS OF SAINT SEBASTIAN

The Catacombs Of Saint Sebastian

I

n his whole life, perhaps, Franz had never before
experienced so sudden an impression, so rapid a
transition from gayety to sadness, as in this moment. It
seemed as though Rome, under the magic breath of some
demon of the night, had suddenly changed into a vast tomb.
By a chance, which added yet more to the intensity of the
darkness, the moon, which was on the wane, did not rise
until eleven o'clock, and the streets which the young man
traversed were plunged in the deepest obscurity. The
distance was short, and at the end of ten minutes his carriage,
or rather the count's, stopped before the Hotel de Londres.
Dinner was waiting, but as Albert had told him that he
should not return so soon, Franz sat down without him.
Signor Pastrini, who had been accustomed to see them dine
together, inquired into the cause of his absence, but Franz
merely replied that Albert had received on the previous
evening an invitation which he had accepted. The sudden
extinction of the moccoletti, the darkness which had
replaced the light, and the silence which had succeeded the
turmoil, had left in Franz's mind a certain depression which
was not free from uneasiness. He therefore dined very
silently, in spite of the officious attention of his host, who
presented himself two or three times to inquire if he wanted
anything.
Franz resolved to wait for Albert as late as possible. He
ordered the carriage, therefore, for eleven o'clock, desiring
Signor Pastrini to inform him the moment that Albert
returned to the hotel. At eleven o'clock Albert had not come
back. Franz dressed himself, and went out, telling his host
that he was going to pass the night at the Duke of
Bracciano's. The house of the Duke of Bracciano is one of the
most delightful in Rome, the duchess, one of the last
heiresses of the Colonnas, does its honors with the most
consummate grace, and thus their fetes have a European
celebrity. Franz and Albert had brought to Rome letters of
introduction to them, and their first question on his arrival
was to inquire the whereabouts of his travelling companion.
Franz replied that he had left him at the moment they were
about to extinguish the moccoli, and that he had lost sight of
him in the Via Macello. "Then he has not returned?" said the
duke.
"I waited for him until this hour," replied Franz.
"And do you know whither he went?"
"No, not precisely; however, I think it was something very
like a rendezvous."
"Diavolo!" said the duke, "this is a bad day, or rather a bad
night, to be out late; is it not, countess!" These words were
addressed to the Countess G---- , who had just arrived, and
was leaning on the arm of Signor Torlonia, the duke's
brother.

at this hour, unless it be to go to a ball?"
"Our friend, Albert de Morcerf, countess, whom I left in
pursuit of his unknown about seven o'clock this evening,"
said Franz, "and whom I have not seen since."
"And don't you know where he is?"
"Not at all."
"Is he armed?"
"He is in masquerade."
"You should not have allowed him to go," said the duke to
Franz; "you, who know Rome better than he does."
"You might as well have tried to stop number three of the
barberi, who gained the prize in the race to-day," replied
Franz; "and then moreover, what could happen to him?"
"Who can tell? The night is gloomy, and the Tiber is very
near the Via Macello." Franz felt a shudder run through his
veins at observing that the feeling of the duke and the
countess was so much in unison with his own personal
disquietude. "I informed them at the hotel that I had the
honor of passing the night here, duke," said Franz, "and
desired them to come and inform me of his return."
"Ah," replied the duke, "here I think, is one of my servants
who is seeking you."
The duke was not mistaken; when he saw Franz, the servant
came up to him. "Your excellency," he said, "the master of
the Hotel de Londres has sent to let you know that a man is
waiting for you with a letter from the Viscount of Morcerf."
"A letter from the viscount!" exclaimed Franz.
"Yes."
"And who is the man?"
"I do not know."
"Why did he not bring it to me here?"
"The messenger did not say."
"And where is the messenger?"
"He went away directly he saw me enter the ball-room to
find you."
"Oh," said the countess to Franz, "go with all speed -- poor
young man! Perhaps some accident has happened to him."
"I will hasten," replied Franz.
"Shall we see you again to give us any information?"
inquired the countess.
"Yes, if it is not any serious affair, otherwise I cannot answer
as to what I may do myself."

"Be prudent, in any event," said the countess.
"I think, on the contrary, that it is a charming night," replied
"Oh, pray be assured of that." Franz took his hat and went
the countess, "and those who are here will complain of but
away in haste. He had sent away his carriage with orders for
one thing -- its too rapid flight."
it to fetch him at two o'clock; fortunately the Palazzo
"I am not speaking," said the duke with a smile, "of the Bracciano, which is on one side in the Corso, and on the
persons who are here; the men run no other danger than that other in the Square of the Holy Apostles, is hardly ten
of falling in love with you, and the women of falling ill of minutes' walk from the Hotel de Londres. As he came near
jealousy at seeing you so lovely; I meant persons who were the hotel, Franz saw a man in the middle of the street. He
out in the streets of Rome."
had no doubt that it was the messenger from Albert. The
"Ah," asked the countess, "who is out in the streets of Rome man was wrapped up in a large cloak. He went up to him,
but, to his extreme astonishment, the stranger first addressed
152

him. "What wants your excellency of me?" inquired the man,
retreating a step or two, as if to keep on his guard.
"Are not you the person who brought me a letter," inquired
Franz, "from the Viscount of Morcerf?"
"Your excellency lodges at Pastrini's hotel?"
"I do."
"Your excellency is the travelling companion of the
viscount?"
"I am."
"Your excellency's name" -"Is the Baron Franz d'Epinay."
"Then it is to your excellency that this letter is addressed."
"Is there any answer?" inquired Franz, taking the letter from
him.

There was no time to lose. He hastened to open the secretary,
and found the pocket-book in the drawer, and in it the letter
of credit. There were in all six thousand piastres, but of these
six thousand Albert had already expended three thousand.
As to Franz, he had no letter of credit, as he lived at Florence,
and had only come to Rome to pass seven or eight days; he
had brought but a hundred louis, and of these he had not
more than fifty left. Thus seven or eight hundred piastres
were wanting to them both to make up the sum that Albert
required. True, he might in such a case rely on the kindness
of Signor Torlonia. He was, therefore, about to return to the
Palazzo Bracciano without loss of time, when suddenly a
luminous idea crossed his mind. He remembered the Count
of Monte Cristo. Franz was about to ring for Signor Pastrini,
when that worthy presented himself. "My dear sir," he said,
hastily, "do you know if the count is within?"
"Yes, your excellency; he has this moment returned."

"Yes -- your friend at least hopes so."

"Is he in bed?"

"Come up-stairs with me, and I will give it to you."

"I should say no."

"I prefer waiting here," said the messenger, with a smile.

"Then ring at his door, if you please, and request him to be
so kind as to give me an audience." Signor Pastrini did as he
was desired, and returning five minutes after, he said, -"The count awaits your excellency." Franz went along the
corridor, and a servant introduced him to the count. He was
in a small room which Franz had not yet seen, and which
was surrounded with divans. The count came towards him.
"Well, what good wind blows you hither at this hour?" said
he; "have you come to sup with me? It would be very kind of
you."

"And why?"
"Your excellency will know when you have read the letter."
"Shall I find you here, then?"
"Certainly."
Franz entered the hotel. On the staircase he met Signor
Pastrini. "Well?" said the landlord.
"Well -- what?" responded Franz.
"You have seen the man who desired to speak with you from
your friend?" he asked of Franz.
"Yes, I have seen him," he replied, "and he has handed this
letter to me. Light the candles in my apartment, if you
please." The inn-keeper gave orders to a servant to go before
Franz with a light. The young man had found Signor Pastrini
looking very much alarmed, and this had only made him the
more anxious to read Albert's letter; and so he went instantly
towards the waxlight, and unfolded it. It was written and
signed by Albert. Franz read it twice before he could
comprehend what it contained. It was thus worded: -My Dear Fellow, -- The moment you have received this, have
the kindness to take the letter of credit from my pocket-book,
which you will find in the square drawer of the secretary;
add your own to it, if it be not sufficient. Run to Torlonia,
draw from him instantly four thousand piastres, and give
them to the bearer. It is urgent that I should have this money
without delay. I do not say more, relying on you as you may
rely on me. Your friend,
Albert de Morcerf.
P.S. -- I now believe in Italian banditti.
Below these lines were written, in a strange hand, the
following in Italian: -Se alle sei della mattina le quattro mile piastre non sono nelle
mie mani, alla sette il conte Alberto avra cessato di vivere.
Luigi Vampa.

"No; I have come to speak to you of a very serious matter."
"A serious matter," said the count, looking at Franz with the
earnestness usual to him; "and what may it be?"
"Are we alone?"
"Yes," replied the count, going to the door, and returning.
Franz gave him Albert's letter. "Read that," he said. The
count read it.
"Well, well!" said he.
"Did you see the postscript?"
"I did, indeed.
"`Se alle sei della mattina le quattro mile piastre non sono
nelle mie mani, alla sette il conte Alberto avra cessato di
vivere.
"`Luigi Vampa.'"
"What think you of that?" inquired Franz.
"Have you the money he demands?"
"Yes, all but eight hundred piastres." The count went to his
secretary, opened it, and pulling out a drawer filled with
gold, said to Franz, -- "I hope you will not offend me by
applying to any one but myself."
"You see, on the contrary, I come to you first and instantly,"
replied Franz.
"And I thank you; have what you will; "and he made a sign
to Franz to take what he pleased.

"If by six in the morning the four thousand piastres are not in "Is it absolutely necessary, then, to send the money to Luigi
my hands, by seven o'clock the Count Albert will have Vampa?" asked the young man, looking fixedly in his turn at
the count.
ceased to live."
This second signature explained everything to Franz, who "Judge for yourself," replied he. "The postscript is explicit."
now understood the objection of the messenger to coming
up into the apartment; the street was safer for him. Albert,
then, had fallen into the hands of the famous bandit chief, in
whose existence he had for so long a time refused to believe.

"I think that if you would take the trouble of reflecting, you
could find a way of simplifying the negotiation," said Franz.
"How so?" returned the count, with surprise.
153


CHAPTER 37


THE CATACOMBS OF SAINT SEBASTIAN

"If we were to go together to Luigi Vampa, I am sure he
would not refuse you Albert's freedom."
"What influence can I possibly have over a bandit?"
"Have you not just rendered him a service that can never be
forgotten?"
"What is that?"
"Have you not saved Peppino's life?"
"Well, well, said the count, "who told you that?"
"No matter; I know it." The count knit his brows, and
remained silent an instant. "And if I went to seek Vampa,
would you accompany me?"

the Roman peasants?"
"It was he who drove, disguised as the coachman," replied
Peppino.
"Well?" said the count.
"Well, then, the Frenchman took off his mask; Teresa, with
the chief's consent, did the same. The Frenchman asked for a
rendezvous; Teresa gave him one -- only, instead of Teresa, it
was Beppo who was on the steps of the church of San
Giacomo."
"What!" exclaimed Franz, "the peasant girl who snatched his
mocoletto from him" --

"Was a lad of fifteen," replied Peppino. "But it was no
disgrace to your friend to have been deceived; Beppo has
"Be it so. It is a lovely night, and a walk without Rome will taken in plenty of others."
do us both good."
"And Beppo led him outside the walls?" said the count.
"If my society would not be disagreeable."

"Shall I take any arms?"

"Exactly so; a carriage was waiting at the end of the Via
Macello. Beppo got in, inviting the Frenchman to follow him,
and he did not wait to be asked twice. He gallantly offered
"Any money?"
the right-hand seat to Beppo, and sat by him. Beppo told him
he was going to take him to a villa a league from Rome; the
"It is useless. Where is the man who brought the letter?"
Frenchman assured him he would follow him to the end of
"In the street."
the world. The coachman went up the Via di Ripetta and the
"He awaits the answer?"
Porta San Paola; and when they were two hundred yards
outside, as the Frenchman became somewhat too forward,
"Yes."
Beppo put a brace of pistols to his head, the coachman
"I must learn where we are going. I will summon him pulled up and did the same. At the same time, four of the
hither."
band, who were concealed on the banks of the Almo,
surrounded the carriage. The Frenchman made some
"It is useless; he would not come up."
resistance, and nearly strangled Beppo; but he could not
"To your apartments, perhaps; but he will not make any
resist five armed men. and was forced to yield. They made
difficulty at entering mine." The count went to the window
him get out, walk along the banks of the river, and then
of the apartment that looked on to the street, and whistled in
brought him to Teresa and Luigi, who were waiting for him
a peculiar manner. The man in the mantle quitted the wall,
in the catacombs of St. Sebastian."
and advanced into the middle of the street. "Salite!" said the
count, in the same tone in which he would have given an "Well," said the count, turning towards Franz, "it seems to
order to his servant. The messenger obeyed without the least me that this is a very likely story. What do you say to it?"
hesitation, but rather with alacrity, and, mounting the steps "Why, that I should think it very amusing," replied Franz, "if
at a bound, entered the hotel; five seconds afterwards he was it had happened to any one but poor Albert."
at the door of the room. "Ah, it is you, Peppino," said the
count. But Peppino, instead of answering, threw himself on "And, in truth, if you had not found me here," said the count,
his knees, seized the count's hand, and covered it with kisses. "it might have proved a gallant adventure which would have
"Ah," said the count, "you have, then, not forgotten that I cost your friend dear; but now, be assured, his alarm will be
the only serious consequence."
saved your life; that is strange, for it is a week ago."
"For what purpose?"

"No, excellency; and never shall I forget it," returned
Peppino, with an accent of profound gratitude.
"Never? That is a long time; but it is something that you
believe so. Rise and answer." Peppino glanced anxiously at
Franz. "Oh, you may speak before his excellency," said he;
"he is one of my friends. You allow me to give you this title?"
continued the count in French, "it is necessary to excite this
man's confidence."

"And shall we go and find him?" inquired Franz.
"Oh, decidedly, sir. He is in a very picturesque place -- do
you know the catacombs of St. Sebastian?"
"I was never in them; but I have often resolved to visit them."
"Well, here is an opportunity made to your hand, and it
would be difficult to contrive a better. Have you a carriage?"
"No."

"You can speak before me," said Franz; "I am a friend of the "That is of no consequence; I always have one ready, day
and night."
count's."
"Good!" returned Peppino. "I am ready to answer any
questions your excellency may address to me."

"Always ready?"

"Yes. I am a very capricious being, and I should tell you that
sometimes when I rise, or after my dinner, or in the middle
of the night, I resolve on starting for some particular point,
"Excellency, the Frenchman's carriage passed several times
and away I go." The count rang, and a footman appeared.
the one in which was Teresa."
"Order out the carriage," he said, "and remove the pistols
"The chief's mistress?"
which are in the holsters. You need not awaken the
"Yes. The Frenchman threw her a bouquet; Teresa returned it coachman; Ali will drive." In a very short time the noise of
-- all this with the consent of the chief, who was in the wheels was heard, and the carriage stopped at the door. The
count took out his watch. "Half-past twelve," he said. "We
carriage."
might start at five o'clock and be in time, but the delay may
"What?" cried Franz, "was Luigi Vampa in the carriage with cause your friend to pass an uneasy night, and therefore we
"How did the Viscount Albert fall into Luigi's hands?"

154

had better go with all speed to extricate him from the hands
of the infidels. Are you still resolved to accompany me?"
"More determined than ever."
"Well, then, come along."
Franz and the count went downstairs, accompanied by
Peppino. At the door they found the carriage. Ali was on the
box, in whom Franz recognized the dumb slave of the grotto
of Monte Cristo. Franz and the count got into the carriage.
Peppino placed himself beside Ali, and they set off at a rapid
pace. Ali had received his instructions, and went down the
Corso, crossed the Campo Vaccino, went up the Strada San
Gregorio, and reached the gates of St. Sebastian. Then the
porter raised some difficulties, but the Count of Monte
Cristo produced a permit from the governor of Rome,
allowing him to leave or enter the city at any hour of the day
or night; the portcullis was therefore raised, the porter had a
louis for his trouble, and they went on their way. The road
which the carriage now traversed was the ancient Appian
Way, and bordered with tombs. From time to time, by the
light of the moon, which began to rise, Franz imagined that
he saw something like a sentinel appear at various points
among the ruins, and suddenly retreat into the darkness on a
signal from Peppino. A short time before they reached the
Baths of Caracalla the carriage stopped, Peppino opened the
door, and the count and Franz alighted.

and the count descended these, and found themselves in a
mortuary chamber. Five corridors diverged like the rays of a
star, and the walls, dug into niches, which were arranged
one above the other in the shape of coffins, showed that they
were at last in the catacombs. Down one of the corridors,
whose extent it was impossible to determine, rays of light
were visible. The count laid his hand on Franz's shoulder.
"Would you like to see a camp of bandits in repose?" he
inquired.
"Exceedingly," replied Franz.

"Come with me, then. Peppino, put out the torch." Peppino
obeyed, and Franz and the count were in utter darkness,
except that fifty paces in advance of them a reddish glare,
more evident since Peppino had put out his torch, was
visible along the wall. They advanced silently, the count
guiding Franz as if he had the singular faculty of seeing in
the dark. Franz himself, however, saw his way more plainly
in proportion as he went on towards the light, which served
in some manner as a guide. Three arcades were before them,
and the middle one was used as a door. These arcades
opened on one side into the corridor where the count and
Franz were, and on the other into a large square chamber,
entirely surrounded by niches similar to those of which we
have spoken. In the midst of this chamber were four stones,
which had formerly served as an altar, as was evident from
the cross which still surmounted them. A lamp, placed at the
"In ten minutes," said the count to his companion, "we shall base of a pillar, lighted up with its pale and flickering flame
be there."
the singular scene which presented itself to the eyes of the
He then took Peppino aside, gave him an order in a low two visitors concealed in the shadow. A man was seated
voice, and Peppino went away, taking with him a torch, with his elbow leaning on the column, and was reading with
brought with them in the carriage. Five minutes elapsed, his back turned to the arcades, through the openings of
during which Franz saw the shepherd going along a narrow which the newcomers contemplated him. This was the chief
path that led over the irregular and broken surface of the of the band, Luigi Vampa. Around him, and in groups,
Campagna; and finally he disappeared in the midst of the according to their fancy, lying in their mantles, or with their
tall red herbage, which seemed like the bristling mane of an backs against a sort of stone bench, which went all round the
enormous lion. "Now," said the count, "let us follow him." columbarium, were to be seen twenty brigands or more,
Franz and the count in their turn then advanced along the each having his carbine within reach. At the other end, silent,
same path, which, at the distance of a hundred paces, led scarcely visible, and like a shadow, was a sentinel, who was
them over a declivity to the bottom of a small valley. They walking up and down before a grotto, which was only
then perceived two men conversing in the obscurity. "Ought distinguishable because in that spot the darkness seemed
we to go on?" asked Franz of the count; "or shall we wait more dense than elsewhere. When the count thought Franz
had gazed sufficiently on this picturesque tableau, he raised
awhile?"
his finger to his lips, to warn him to be silent, and, ascending
"Let us go on; Peppino will have warned the sentry of our the three steps which led to the corridor of the columbarium,
coming." One of the two men was Peppino, and the other a entered the chamber by the middle arcade, and advanced
bandit on the lookout. Franz and the count advanced, and towards Vampa, who was so intent on the book before him
the bandit saluted them. "Your excellency," said Peppino, that he did not hear the noise of his footsteps.
addressing the count, "if you will follow me, the opening of
"Who comes there?" cried the sentinel, who was less
the catacombs is close at hand."
abstracted, and who saw by the lamp-light a shadow
"Go on, then," replied the count. They came to an opening approaching his chief. At this challenge, Vampa rose quickly,
behind a clump of bushes and in the midst of a pile of rocks, drawing at the same moment a pistol from his girdle. In a
by which a man could scarcely pass. Peppino glided first moment all the bandits were on their feet, and twenty
into this crevice; after they got along a few paces the passage carbines were levelled at the count. "Well," said he in a voice
widened. Peppino passed, lighted his torch, and turned to perfectly calm, and no muscle of his countenance disturbed,
see if they came after him. The count first reached an open "well, my dear Vampa, it appears to me that you receive a
space and Franz followed him closely. The passageway friend with a great deal of ceremony."
sloped in a gentle descent, enlarging as they proceeded; still
Franz and the count were compelled to advance in a "Ground arms," exclaimed the chief, with an imperative sign
stooping posture, and were scarcely able to proceed abreast of the hand, while with the other he took off his hat
of one another. They went on a hundred and fifty paces in respectfully; then, turning to the singular personage who
this way, and then were stopped by, "Who comes there?" At had caused this scene, he said, "Your pardon, your
the same time they saw the reflection of a torch on a carbine excellency, but I was so far from expecting the honor of a
visit, that I did not really recognize you."
barrel.
"A friend!" responded Peppino; and, advancing alone
towards the sentry, he said a few words to him in a low tone;
and then he, like the first, saluted the nocturnal visitors,
making a sign that they might proceed.
Behind the sentinel was a staircase with twenty steps. Franz

"It seems that your memory is equally short in everything,
Vampa," said the count, "and that not only do you forget
people's faces, but also the conditions you make with them."
"What conditions have I forgotten, your excellency?"
inquired the bandit, with the air of a man who, having
155


CHAPTER 37


THE CATACOMBS OF SAINT SEBASTIAN

committed an error, is anxious to repair it.
"Was it not agreed," asked the count, "that not only my
person, but also that of my friends, should be respected by
you?"
"And how have I broken that treaty, your excellency?"
"You have this evening carried off and conveyed hither the
Vicomte Albert de Morcerf. Well," continued the count, in a
tone that made Franz shudder, "this young gentleman is one
of my friends -- this young gentleman lodges in the same
hotel as myself -- this young gentleman has been up and
down the Corso for eight hours in my private carriage, and
yet, I repeat to you, you have carried him off, and conveyed
him hither, and," added the count, taking the letter from his
pocket, "you have set a ransom on him, as if he were an utter
stranger."
"Why did you not tell me all this -- you?" inquired the
brigand chief, turning towards his men, who all retreated
before his look. "Why have you caused me thus to fail in my
word towards a gentleman like the count, who has all our
lives in his hands? By heavens, if I thought one of you knew
that the young gentleman was the friend of his excellency, I
would blow his brains out with my own hand!"
"Well," said the count, turning towards Franz, "I told you
there was some mistake in this."
"Are you not alone?" asked Vampa with uneasiness.

dream. I was dancing the galop at Torlonia's with the
Countess G---- ." Then he drew his watch from his pocket,
that he might see how time sped.
"Half-past one only?" said he. "Why the devil do you rouse
me at this hour?"
"To tell you that you are free, your excellency."
"My dear fellow," replied Albert, with perfect ease of mind,
"remember, for the future, Napoleon's maxim, `Never
awaken me but for bad news;' if you had let me sleep on, I
should have finished my galop, and have been grateful to
you all my life. So, then, they have paid my ransom?"
"No, your excellency."
"Well, then, how am I free?"
"A person to whom I can refuse nothing has come to
demand you."
"Come hither?"
"Yes, hither."
"Really? Then that person is a most amiable person." Albert
looked around and perceived Franz. "What," said he, "is it
you, my dear Franz, whose devotion and friendship are thus
displayed?"
"No, not I," replied Franz, "but our neighbor, the Count of
Monte Cristo."

"Oh. my dear count." said Albert gayly, arranging his cravat
and wristbands, "you are really most kind, and I hope you
will consider me as under eternal obligations to you, in the
first place for the carriage, and in the next for this visit," and
he put out his hand to the Count, who shuddered as he gave
his own, but who nevertheless did give it. The bandit gazed
on this scene with amazement; he was evidently accustomed
to see his prisoners tremble before him, and yet here was one
whose gay temperament was not for a moment altered; as
for Franz, he was enchanted at the way in which Albert had
sustained the national honor in the presence of the bandit.
"My dear Albert," he said, "if you will make haste, we shall
"But," said Franz, looking round him uneasily, "where is the yet have time to finish the night at Torlonia's. You may
Viscount? -- I do not see him."
conclude your interrupted galop, so that you will owe no
"Nothing has happened to him, I hope," said the count ill-will to Signor Luigi, who has, indeed, throughout this
whole affair acted like a gentleman."
frowningly.
"I am with the person to whom this letter was addressed,
and to whom I desired to prove that Luigi Vampa was a man
of his word. Come, your excellency," the count added,
turning to Franz, "here is Luigi Vampa, who will himself
express to you his deep regret at the mistake he has
committed." Franz approached, the chief advancing several
steps to meet him. "Welcome among us, your excellency," he
said to him; "you heard what the count just said, and also my
reply; let me add that I would not for the four thousand
piastres at which I had fixed your friend's ransom, that this
had happened."

"The prisoner is there," replied Vampa, pointing to the
hollow space in front of which the bandit was on guard,
"and I will go myself and tell him he is free." The chief went
towards the place he had pointed out as Albert's prison, and
Franz and the count followed him. "What is the prisoner
doing?" inquired Vampa of the sentinel.

"You are decidedly right, and we may reach the Palazzo by
two o'clock. Signor Luigi," continued Albert, "is there any
formality to fulfil before I take leave of your excellency?"
"None, sir," replied the bandit, "you are as free as air."
"Well, then, a happy and merry life to you. Come, gentlemen,
come."

"Ma foi, captain," replied the sentry, "I do not know; for the
And Albert, followed by Franz and the count, descended the
last hour I have not heard him stir."
staircase, crossed the square chamber, where stood all the
"Come in, your excellency," said Vampa. The count and bandits, hat in hand. "Peppino," said the brigand chief, "give
Franz ascended seven or eight steps after the chief, who me the torch."
drew back a bolt and opened a door. Then, by the gleam of a
lamp, similar to that which lighted the columbarium, Albert "What are you going to do?" inquired the count.
was to be seen wrapped up in a cloak which one of the "l will show you the way back myself," said the captain; "that
bandits had lent him, lying in a corner in profound slumber. is the least honor that I can render to your excellency." And
"Come," said the count, smiling with his own peculiar smile, taking the lighted torch from the hands of the herdsman, he
"not so bad for a man who is to be shot at seven o'clock preceded his guests, not as a servant who performs an act of
to-morrow morning." Vampa looked at Albert with a kind of civility, but like a king who precedes ambassadors. On
admiration; he was not insensible to such a proof of courage. reaching the door, he bowed. "And now, your excellency,"
"You are right, your excellency," he said; "this must be one of added he, "allow me to repeat my apologies, and I hope you
your friends." Then going to Albert, he touched him on the will not entertain any resentment at what has occurred."
shoulder, saying, "Will your excellency please to awaken?" "No, my dear Vampa," replied the count; "besides, you
Albert stretched out his arms, rubbed his eyelids, and compensate for your mistakes in so gentlemanly a way, that
opened his eyes. "Oh," said he, "is it you, captain? You one almost feels obliged to you for having committed them."
should have allowed me to sleep. I had such a delightful
156

"Gentlemen," added the chief, turning towards the young
men, "perhaps the offer may not appear very tempting to
you; but if you should ever feel inclined to pay me a second
visit, wherever I may be, you shall be welcome." Franz and
Albert bowed. The count went out first, then Albert. Franz
paused for a moment. "Has your excellency anything to ask
me?" said Vampa with a smile.

anxious to finish my night at the Duke of Bracciano's." They
found the carriage where they had left it. The count said a
word in Arabic to Ali, and the horses went on at great speed.
It was just two o'clock by Albert's watch when the two
friends entered into the dancing-room. Their return was
quite an event, but as they entered together, all uneasiness
on Albert's account ceased instantly. "Madame," said the
Viscount of Morcerf, advancing towards the countess,
"Yes, I have," replied Franz; "I am curious to know what
"yesterday you were so condescending as to promise me a
work you were perusing with so much attention as we
galop; I am rather late in claiming this gracious promise, but
entered."
here is my friend, whose character for veracity you well
"Caesar's `Commentaries,'" said the bandit, "it is my favorite know, and he will assure you the delay arose from no fault
work."
of mine." And as at this moment the orchestra gave the
signal for the waltz, Albert put his arm round the waist of
"Well, are you coming?" asked Albert.
the countess, and disappeared with her in the whirl of
"Yes," replied Franz, "here I am," and he, in his turn, left the dancers. In the meanwhile Franz was considering the
caves. They advanced to the plain. "Ah, your pardon," said singular shudder that had passed over the Count of Monte
Albert, turning round; "will you allow me, captain?" And he Cristo at the moment when he had been, in some sort, forced
lighted his cigar at Vampa's torch. "Now, my dear count," he to give his hand to Albert.
said, "let us on with all the speed we may. I am enormously

157


CHAPTER 38


Chapter 38

T

THE COMPACT

The Compact

he first words that Albert uttered to his friend, on the
following morning, contained a request that Franz
would accompany him on a visit to the count; true, the
young man had warmly and energetically thanked the count
on the previous evening; but services such as he had
rendered could never be too often acknowledged. Franz,
who seemed attracted by some invisible influence towards
the count, in which terror was strangely mingled, felt an
extreme reluctance to permit his friend to be exposed alone
to the singular fascination that this mysterious personage
seemed to exercise over him, and therefore made no
objection to Albert's request, but at once accompanied him to
the desired spot, and, after a short delay, the count joined
them in the salon. "My dear count," said Albert, advancing to
meet him, "permit me to repeat the poor thanks I offered last
night, and to assure you that the remembrance of all I owe to
you will never be effaced from my memory; believe me, as
long as I live, I shall never cease to dwell with grateful
recollection on the prompt and important service you
rendered me; and also to remember that to you I am
indebted even for my life."

acquainted with the wonders and beauties of your justly
celebrated capital, had I known any person who would have
introduced me into the fashionable world, but unfortunately
I possessed no acquaintance there, and, of necessity, was
compelled to abandon the idea."

"My very good friend and excellent neighbor," replied the
count, with a smile, "you really exaggerate my trifling
exertions. You owe me nothing but some trifle of 20,000
francs, which you have been saved out of your travelling
expenses, so that there is not much of a score between us; -but you must really permit me to congratulate you on the
ease and unconcern with which you resigned yourself to
your fate, and the perfect indifference you manifested as to
the turn events might take."

"Oh, that I do, and with infinite pleasure," answered Albert;
"and so much the more readily as a letter received this
morning from my father summons me to Paris, in
consequence of a treaty of marriage (my dear Franz, do not
smile, I beg of you) with a family of high standing, and
connected with the very cream of Parisian society."

"So distinguished an individual as yourself," cried Albert,
"could scarcely have required an introduction."
"You are most kind; but as regards myself, I can find no
merit I possess, save that, as a millionaire, I might have
become a partner in the speculations of M. Aguado and M.
Rothschild; but as my motive in travelling to your capital
would not have been for the pleasure of dabbling in stocks, I
stayed away till some favorable chance should present itself
of carrying my wish into execution. Your offer, however,
smooths all difficulties, and I have only to ask you, my dear
M. de Morcerf" (these words were accompanied by a most
peculiar smile), "whether you undertake, upon my arrival in
France, to open to me the doors of that fashionable world of
which I know no more than a Huron or a native of
Cochin-China?"

"Connected by marriage, you mean," said Franz, laughingly.

"Well, never mind how it is," answered Albert, "it comes to
the same thing in the end. Perhaps by the time you return to
"Upon my word," said Albert, "I deserve no credit for what I Paris, I shall be quite a sober, staid father of a family! A most
could not help, namely, a determination to take everything edifying representative I shall make of all the domestic
as I found it, and to let those bandits see, that although men virtues -- don't you think so? But as regards your wish to
get into troublesome scrapes all over the world, there is no visit our fine city, my dear count, I can only say that you
nation but the French that can smile even in the face of grim may command me and mine to any extent you please."
Death himself. All that, however, has nothing to do with my
obligations to you, and I now come to ask you whether, in "Then it is settled," said the count, "and I give you my
my own person, my family, or connections, I can in any way solemn assurance that I only waited an opportunity like the
serve you? My father, the Comte de Morcerf, although of present to realize plans that I have long meditated." Franz
Spanish origin, possesses considerable influence, both at the did not doubt that these plans were the same concerning
court of France and Madrid, and I unhesitatingly place the which the count had dropped a few words in the grotto of
best services of myself, and all to whom my life is dear, at Monte Cristo, and while the Count was speaking the young
man watched him closely, hoping to read something of his
your disposal."
purpose in his face, but his countenance was inscrutable
"Monsieur de Morcerf," replied the count, "your offer, far especially when, as in the present case, it was veiled in a
from surprising me, is precisely what I expected from you, sphinx-like smile. "But tell me now, count," exclaimed Albert,
and I accept it in the same spirit of hearty sincerity with delighted at the idea of having to chaperon so distinguished
which it is made; -- nay, I will go still further, and say that I a person as Monte Cristo; "tell me truly whether you are in
had previously made up my mind to ask a great favor at earnest, or if this project of visiting Paris is merely one of the
your hands."
chimerical and uncertain air castles of which we make so
many in the course of our lives, but which, like a house built
"Oh, pray name it."
on the sand, is liable to be blown over by the first puff of
"I am wholly a stranger to Paris -- it is a city I have never yet
wind?"
seen."
"I pledge you my honor," returned the count, "that I mean to
"Is it possible," exclaimed Albert, "that you have reached
do as I have said; both inclination and positive necessity
your present age without visiting the finest capital in the
compel me to visit Paris."
world? I can scarcely credit it."
"When do you propose going thither?"
"Nevertheless, it is quite true; still, I agree with you in
thinking that my present ignorance of the first city in Europe "Have you made up your mind when you shall be there
is a reproach to me in every way, and calls for immediate yourself?"
correction; but, in all probability, I should have performed so "Certainly I have; in a fortnight or three weeks' time, that is
important, so necessary a duty, as that of making myself to say, as fast as I can get there!"
158

"Nay," said the Count; "I will give you three months ere I their own apartments; "you seem more than commonly
join you; you see I make an ample allowance for all delays thoughtful."
and difficulties.
"I will confess to you, Albert," replied Franz, "the count is a
"And in three months' time," said Albert, "you will be at my very singular person, and the appointment you have made
house?"
to meet him in Paris fills me with a thousand
apprehensions."
"Shall we make a positive appointment for a particular day
and hour?" inquired the count; "only let me warn you that I "My dear fellow," exclaimed Albert, "what can there possibly
am proverbial for my punctilious exactitude in keeping my be in that to excite uneasiness? Why, you must have lost
engagements."
your senses."
"Day for day, hour for hour," said Albert; "that will suit me
to a dot."

"Whether I am in my senses or not," answered Franz, "that is
the way I feel."

"So be it, then," replied the count, and extending his hand
towards a calendar, suspended near the chimney-piece, he
said, "to-day is the 21st of February;" and drawing out his
watch, added, "it is exactly half-past ten o'clock. Now
promise me to remember this, and expect me the 21st of May
at the same hour in the forenoon."

"Listen to me, Franz," said Albert; "I am glad that the
occasion has presented itself for saying this to you, for I have
noticed how cold you are in your bearing towards the count,
while he, on the other hand, has always been courtesy itself
to us. Have you anything particular against him?"

"Capital," exclaimed Albert; "your breakfast shall be
waiting."
"Where do you live?"
"No. 27, Rue du Helder."
"Have you bachelor's apartments there? I hope my coming
will not put you to any inconvenience."

"Possibly."
"Did you ever meet him previously to coming hither?"
"I have."
"And where?"
"Will you promise me not to repeat a single word of what I
am about to tell you?"

"I promise."
"I reside in my father's house, but occupy a pavilion at the
farther side of the court-yard, entirely separated from the "Upon your honor?"
main building."
"Upon my honor."
"Quite sufficient," replied the count, as, taking out his tablets, "Then listen to me." Franz then related to his friend the
he wrote down "No. 27, Rue du Helder, 21st May, half-past history of his excursion to the Island of Monte Cristo and of
ten in the morning."
his finding a party of smugglers there, and the two Corsican
"Now then," said the count, returning his tablets to his
pocket, "make yourself perfectly easy; the hand of your
time-piece will not be more accurate in marking the time
than myself."
"Shall I see you again ere my departure?" asked Albert.
"That depends; when do you leave?"
"To-morrow evening, at five o'clock."
"In that case I must say adieu to you, as I am compelled to go
to Naples, and shall not return hither before Saturday
evening or Sunday morning. And you, baron," pursued the
count, addressing Franz, "do you also depart to-morrow?"
"Yes."
"For France?"
"No, for Venice; I shall remain in Italy for another year or
two."
"Then we shall not meet in Paris?"
"I fear I shall not have that honor."
"Well, since we must part," said the count, holding out a
hand to each of the young men, "allow me to wish you both
a safe and pleasant journey." It was the first time the hand of
Franz had come in contact with that of the mysterious
individual before him, and unconsciously he shuddered at
its touch, for it felt cold and icy as that of a corpse. "Let us
understand each other," said Albert; "it is agreed -- is it not?
-- that you are to be at No. 27, in the Rue du Helder, on the
21st of May, at half-past ten in the morning, and your word
of honor passed for your punctuality?"
"The 21st of May, at half-past ten in the morning, Rue du
Helder, No. 27," replied the Count. The young men then rose,
and bowing to the count, quitted the room. "What is the
matter?" asked Albert of Franz, when they had returned to

bandits with them. He dwelt with considerable force and
energy on the almost magical hospitality he had received
from the count, and the magnificence of his entertainment in
the grotto of the "Thousand and One Nights." He recounted,
with circumstantial exactitude, all the particulars of the
supper, the hashish, the statues, the dream, and how, at his
awakening, there remained no proof or trace of all these
events, save the small yacht, seen in the distant horizon
driving under full sail toward Porto-Vecchio. Then he
detailed the conversation overheard by him at the
Colosseum, between the count and Vampa, in which the
count had promised to obtain the release of the bandit
Peppino, -- an engagement which, as our readers are aware,
he most faithfully fulfilled. At last he arrived at the
adventure of the preceding night, and the embarrassment in
which he found himself placed by not having sufficient cash
by six or seven hundred piastres to make up the sum
required, and finally of his application to the count and the
picturesque and satisfactory result that followed. Albert
listened with the most profound attention. "Well," said he,
when Franz had concluded, "what do you find to object to in
all you have related? The count is fond of travelling, and,
being rich, possesses a vessel of his own. Go but to
Portsmouth or Southampton, and you will find the harbors
crowded with the yachts belonging to such of the English as
can afford the expense, and have the same liking for this
amusement. Now, by way of having a resting-place during
his excursions, avoiding the wretched cookery -- which has
been trying its best to poison me during the last four months,
while you have manfully resisted its effects for as many
years, -- and obtaining a bed on which it is possible to
slumber, Monte Cristo has furnished for himself a temporary
abode where you first found him; but, to prevent the
possibility of the Tuscan government taking a fancy to his
enchanted palace, and thereby depriving him of the
advantages naturally expected from so large an outlay of
159


CHAPTER 38

capital, he has wisely enough purchased the island, and
taken its name. Just ask yourself, my good fellow, whether
there are not many persons of our acquaintance who assume
the names of lands and properties they never in their lives
were masters of?"

THE COMPACT
assistance, you promptly went to him, saying, `My friend
Albert de Morcerf is in danger; help me to deliver him.' Was
not that nearly what you said?"
"It was."

"Well, then, did he ask you, `Who is M. Albert de Morcerf?
how does he come by his name -- his fortune? what are his
means of existence? what is his birthplace! of what country is
"Why, really the thing seems to me simple enough. Nobody he a native?' Tell me, did he put all these questions to you?"
knows better than yourself that the bandits of Corsica are not
"I confess he asked me none."
rogues or thieves, but purely and simply fugitives, driven by
some sinister motive from their native town or village, and "No; he merely came and freed me from the hands of Signor
that their fellowship involves no disgrace or stigma; for my Vampa, where, I can assure you, in spite of all my outward
own part, I protest that, should I ever go to Corsica, my first appearance of ease and unconcern, I did not very
visit, ere even I presented myself to the mayor or prefect, particularly care to remain. Now, then, Franz, when, for
should be to the bandits of Colomba, if I could only manage services so promptly and unhesitatingly rendered, he but
to find them; for, on my conscience, they are a race of men I asks me in return to do for him what is done daily for any
Russian prince or Italian nobleman who may pass through
admire greatly."
Paris -- merely to introduce him into society -- would you
"Still," persisted Franz, "I suppose you will allow that such
have me refuse? My good fellow, you must have lost your
men as Vampa and his band are regular villains, who have
senses to think it possible I could act with such cold-blooded
no other motive than plunder when they seize your person.
policy." And this time it must be confessed that, contrary to
How do you explain the influence the count evidently
the usual state of affairs in discussions between the young
possessed over those ruffians?"
men, the effective arguments were all on Albert's side.
"My good friend, as in all probability I own my present
"Well," said Franz with a sigh, "do as you please my dear
safety to that influence, it would ill become me to search too
viscount, for your arguments are beyond my powers of
closely into its source; therefore, instead of condemning him
refutation. Still, in spite of all, you must admit that this
for his intimacy with outlaws, you must give me leave to
Count of Monte Cristo is a most singular personage."
excuse any little irregularity there may be in such a
connection; not altogether for preserving my life, for my own "He is a philanthropist," answered the other; "and no doubt
idea was that it never was in much danger, but certainly for his motive in visiting Paris is to compete for the Monthyon
saving me 4,000 piastres, which, being translated, means prize, given, as you are aware, to whoever shall be proved to
neither more nor less than 24,000 livres of our money -- a have most materially advanced the interests of virtue and
sum at which, most assuredly, I should never have been humanity. If my vote and interest can obtain it for him, I will
estimated in France, proving most indisputably," added readily give him the one and promise the other. And now,
Albert with a laugh, "that no prophet is honored in his own my dear Franz, let us talk of something else. Come, shall we
take our luncheon, and then pay a last visit to St. Peter's?"
country."
Franz silently assented; and the following afternoon, at
"Talking of countries," replied Franz, "of what country is the
half-past five o'clock, the young men parted. Albert de
count, what is his native tongue, whence does he derive his
Morcerf to return to Paris, and Franz d'Epinay to pass a
immense fortune, and what were those events of his early
fortnight at Venice. But, ere he entered his travelling carriage,
life -- a life as marvellous as unknown -- that have tinctured
Albert, fearing that his expected guest might forget the
his succeeding years with so dark and gloomy a
engagement he had entered into, placed in the care of a
misanthropy? Certainly these are questions that, in your
waiter at the hotel a card to be delivered to the Count of
place, I should like to have answered."
Monte Cristo, on which, beneath the name of Vicomte Albert
"My dear Franz," replied Albert, "when, upon receipt of my de Morcerf, he had written in pencil -- "27, Rue du Helder,
letter, you found the necessity of asking the count's on the 21st May, half-past ten A.M."
"But," said Franz, "the Corsican bandits that were among the
crew of his vessel?"

160


Chapter 39

I

n the house in the Rue du Helder, where Albert had
invited the Count of Monte Cristo, everything was being
prepared on the morning of the 21st of May to do honor to
the occasion. Albert de Morcerf inhabited a pavilion situated
at the corner of a large court, and directly opposite another
building, in which were the servants' apartments. Two
windows only of the pavilion faced the street; three other
windows looked into the court, and two at the back into the
garden. Between the court and the garden, built in the heavy
style of the imperial architecture, was the large and
fashionable dwelling of the Count and Countess of Morcerf.
A high wall surrounded the whole of the hotel, surmounted
at intervals by vases filled with flowers, and broken in the
centre by a large gate of gilded iron, which served as the
carriage entrance. A small door, close to the lodge of the
concierge, gave ingress and egress to the servants and
masters when they were on foot.
It was easy to discover that the delicate care of a mother,
unwilling to part from her son, and yet aware that a young
man of the viscount's age required the full exercise of his
liberty, had chosen this habitation for Albert. There were not
lacking, however, evidences of what we may call the
intelligent egoism of a youth who is charmed with the
indolent, careless life of an only son, and who lives as it were
in a gilded cage. By means of the two windows looking into
the street, Albert could see all that passed; the sight of what
is going on is necessary to young men, who always want to
see the world traverse their horizon, even if that horizon is
only a public thoroughfare. Then, should anything appear to
merit a more minute examination, Albert de Morcerf could
follow up his researches by means of a small gate, similar to
that close to the concierge's door, and which merits a
particular description. It was a little entrance that seemed
never to have been opened since the house was built, so
entirely was it covered with dust and dirt; but the well-oiled
hinges and locks told quite another story. This door was a
mockery to the concierge, from whose vigilance and
jurisdiction it was free, and, like that famous portal in the
"Arabian Nights," opening at the "Sesame" of Ali Baba, it was
wont to swing backward at a cabalistic word or a concerted
tap from without from the sweetest voices or whitest fingers
in the world. At the end of a long corridor, with which the
door communicated, and which formed the ante-chamber,
was, on the right, Albert's breakfast-room, looking into the
court, and on the left the salon, looking into the garden.
Shrubs and creeping plants covered the windows, and hid
from the garden and court these two apartments, the only
rooms into which, as they were on the ground-floor, the
prying eyes of the curious could penetrate. On the floor
above were similar rooms, with the addition of a third,
formed out of the ante-chamber; these three rooms were a
salon, a boudoir, and a bedroom. The salon down-stairs was
only an Algerian divan, for the use of smokers. The boudoir
up-stairs communicated with the bed-chamber by an
invisible door on the staircase; it was evident that every
precaution had been taken. Above this floor was a large
atelier, which had been increased in size by pulling down
the partitions -- a pandemonium, in which the artist and the
dandy strove for preeminence. There were collected and
piled up all Albert's successive caprices, hunting-horns,
bass-viols, flutes -- a whole orchestra, for Albert had had not
a taste but a fancy for music; easels, palettes, brushes, pencils

The Guests
-- for music had been succeeded by painting; foils,
boxing-gloves, broadswords, and single-sticks -- for,
following the example of the fashionable young men of the
time, Albert de Morcerf cultivated, with far more
perseverance than music and drawing, the three arts that
complete a dandy's education, i.e., fencing, boxing, and
single-stick; and it was here that he received Grisier, Cook,
and Charles Leboucher. The rest of the furniture of this
privileged apartment consisted of old cabinets, filled with
Chinese porcelain and Japanese vases, Lucca della Robbia
faience, and Palissy platters; of old arm-chairs, in which
perhaps had sat Henry IV. or Sully, Louis XIII. or Richelieu -for two of these arm-chairs, adorned with a carved shield, on
which were engraved the fleur-de-lis of France on an azure
field evidently came from the Louvre, or, at least, some royal
residence. Over these dark and sombre chairs were thrown
splendid stuffs, dyed beneath Persia's sun, or woven by the
fingers of the women of Calcutta or of Chandernagor. What
these stuffs did there, it was impossible to say; they awaited,
while gratifying the eyes, a destination unknown to their
owner himself; in the meantime they filled the place with
their golden and silky reflections. In the centre of the room
was a Roller and Blanchet "baby grand" piano in rosewood,
but holding the potentialities of an orchestra in its narrow
and sonorous cavity, and groaning beneath the weight of the
chefs-d'oeuvre of Beethoven, Weber, Mozart, Haydn, Gretry,
and Porpora. On the walls, over the doors, on the ceiling,
were swords, daggers, Malay creeses, maces, battle-axes;
gilded, damasked, and inlaid suits of armor; dried plants,
minerals, and stuffed birds, their flame-colored wings
outspread in motionless flight, and their beaks forever open.
This was Albert's favorite lounging place.
However, the morning of the appointment, the young man
had established himself in the small salon down-stairs. There,
on a table, surrounded at some distance by a large and
luxurious divan, every species of tobacco known, -- from the
yellow tobacco of Petersburg to the black of Sinai, and so on
along the scale from Maryland and Porto-Rico, to Latakia, -was exposed in pots of crackled earthenware of which the
Dutch are so fond; beside them, in boxes of fragrant wood,
were ranged, according to their size and quality, pueros,
regalias, havanas, and manillas; and, in an open cabinet, a
collection of German pipes, of chibouques, with their amber
mouth-pieces ornamented with coral, and of narghiles, with
their long tubes of morocco, awaiting the caprice or the
sympathy of the smokers. Albert had himself presided at the
arrangement, or, rather, the symmetrical derangement,
which, after coffee, the guests at a breakfast of modern days
love to contemplate through the vapor that escapes from
their mouths, and ascends in long and fanciful wreaths to
the ceiling. At a quarter to ten, a valet entered; he composed,
with a little groom named John, and who only spoke English,
all Albert's establishment, although the cook of the hotel was
always at his service, and on great occasions the count's
chasseur also. This valet, whose name was Germain, and
who enjoyed the entire confidence of his young master, held
in one hand a number of papers, and in the other a packet of
letters, which he gave to Albert. Albert glanced carelessly at
the different missives, selected two written in a small and
delicate hand, and enclosed in scented envelopes, opened
them and perused their contents with some attention. "How
did these letters come?" said he.
161


CHAPTER 39


THE GUESTS

"One by the post, Madame Danglars' footman left the other."

on a black coat buttoned up."

"Let Madame Danglars know that I accept the place she
offers me in her box. Wait; then, during the day, tell Rosa
that when I leave the Opera I will sup with her as she wishes.
Take her six bottles of different wine -- Cyprus, sherry, and
Malaga, and a barrel of Ostend oysters; get them at Borel's,
and be sure you say they are for me."

"And makes you resemble the Prince of Wales or the Duke of
Reichstadt."
"It is for that reason you see me so early."
"Because you have the order of Charles III., and you wish to
announce the good news to me?"

"No, because I passed the night writing letters, -- five and
twenty despatches. I returned home at daybreak, and strove
"What time is it now?"
to sleep; but my head ached and I got up to have a ride for
"A quarter to ten."
an hour. At the Bois de Boulogne, ennui and hunger attacked
me at once, -- two enemies who rarely accompany each other,
"Very well, at half past ten. Debray will, perhaps, be obliged
and who are yet leagued against me, a sort of
to go to the minister -- and besides" (Albert looked at his
Carlo-republican alliance. I then recollected you gave a
tablets), "it is the hour I told the count, 21st May, at half past
breakfast this morning, and here I am. I am hungry, feed me;
ten; and though I do not much rely upon his promise, I wish
I am bored, amuse me."
to be punctual. Is the countess up yet?"
"It is my duty as your host," returned Albert, ringing the bell,
"If you wish, I will inquire."
while Lucien turned over, with his gold-mounted cane, the
"Yes, ask her for one of her liqueur cellarets, mine is papers that lay on the table. "Germain, a glass of sherry and
incomplete; and tell her I shall have the honor of seeing her a biscuit. In the meantime. my dear Lucien, here are cigars -about three o'clock, and that I request permission to contraband, of course -- try them, and persuade the minister
introduce some one to her." The valet left the room. Albert to sell us such instead of poisoning us with cabbage leaves."
threw himself on the divan, tore off the cover of two or three
"Peste, I will do nothing of the kind; the moment they come
of the papers, looked at the theatre announcements, made a
from government you would find them execrable. Besides,
face seeing they gave an opera, and not a ballet; hunted
that does not concern the home but the financial department.
vainly amongst the advertisements for a new tooth-powder
Address yourself to M. Humann, section of the indirect
of which he had heard, and threw down, one after the other,
contributions, corridor A., No. 26."
the three leading papers of Paris, muttering, "These papers
become more and more stupid every day." A moment after, "On my word," said Albert, "you astonish me by the extent of
a carriage stopped before the door, and the servant your knowledge. Take a cigar."
announced M. Lucien Debray. A tall young man, with light
"Really, my dear Albert," replied Lucien, lighting a manilla
hair, clear gray eyes, and thin and compressed lips, dressed
at a rose-colored taper that burnt in a be beautifully
in a blue coat with beautifully carved gold buttons, a white
enamelled stand -- "how happy you are to have nothing to
neckcloth, and a tortoiseshell eye-glass suspended by a
do. You do not know your own good fortune!"
silken thread, and which, by an effort of the superciliary and
zygomatic muscles, he fixed in his eye, entered, with a "And what would you do, my dear diplomatist," replied
half-official air, without smiling or speaking. "Good-morning, Morcerf, with a slight degree of irony in his voice, "if you did
Lucien, good-morning," said Albert; "your punctuality really nothing? What? private secretary to a minister, plunged at
alarms me. What do I say? punctuality! You, whom I once into European cabals and Parisian intrigues; having
expected last, you arrive at five minutes to ten, when the kings, and, better still, queens, to protect, parties to unite,
elections to direct; making more use of your cabinet with
time fixed was half-past! Has the ministry resigned?"
your pen and your telegraph than Napoleon did of his
"No, my dear fellow," returned the young man, seating
battle-fields with his sword and his victories; possessing five
himself on the divan; "reassure yourself; we are tottering
and twenty thousand francs a year, besides your place; a
always, but we never fall, and I begin to believe that we shall
horse, for which Chateau-Renaud offered you four hundred
pass into a state of immobility, and then the affairs of the
louis, and which you would not part with; a tailor who never
Peninsula will completely consolidate us."
disappoints you; with the opera, the jockey-club, and other
"Ah, true; you drive Don Carlos out of Spain."
diversions, can you not amuse yourself? Well, I will amuse
you."
"No, no, my dear fellow, do not confound our plans. We take
him to the other side of the French frontier, and offer him "How?"
hospitality at Bourges."
"By introducing to you a new acquaintance."
"At Bourges?"
"A man or a woman?"
"Yes, he has not much to complain of; Bourges is the capital
"A man."
of Charles VII. Do you not know that all Paris knew it
yesterday, and the day before it had already transpired on "I know so many men already."
the Bourse, and M. Danglars (I do not know by what means "But you do not know this man."
that man contrives to obtain intelligence as soon as we do)
"Where does he come from -- the end of the world?"
made a million!"
"And you another order, for I see you have a blue ribbon at "Farther still, perhaps."
"At what o'clock, sir, do you breakfast?"

your button-hole."

"The deuce! I hope he does not bring our breakfast with
"Yes; they sent me the order of Charles III.," returned Debray, him."
carelessly.
"Oh, no; our breakfast comes from my father's kitchen. Are
"Come, do not affect indifference, but confess you were you hungry?"
pleased to have it."
"Oh, it is very well as a finish to the toilet. It looks very neat
162

"Humiliating as such a confession is, I am. But I dined at M.
de Villefort's, and lawyers always give you very bad dinners.
You would think they felt some remorse; did you ever

remark that?"
"Ah, depreciate other persons' dinners; you ministers give
such splendid ones."
"Yes; but we do not invite people of fashion. If we were not
forced to entertain a parcel of country boobies because they
think and vote with us, we should never dream of dining at
home, I assure you."
"Well, take another glass of sherry and another biscuit."
"Willingly. Your Spanish wine is excellent. You see we were
quite right to pacify that country."
"Yes; but Don Carlos?"
"Well, Don Carlos will drink Bordeaux, and in ten years we
will marry his son to the little queen."
"You will then obtain the Golden Fleece, if you are still in the
ministry."
"I think, Albert, you have adopted the system of feeding me
on smoke this morning."

"M. Beauchamp," announced the servant. "Come in, come
in," said Albert, rising and advancing to meet the young man.
"Here is Debray, who detests you without reading you, so he
says."
"He is quite right," returned Beauchamp; "for I criticise him
without knowing what he does. Good-day, commander!"
"Ah, you know that already," said the private secretary,
smiling and shaking hands with him.
"Pardieu?"
"And what do they say of it in the world?"
"In which world? we have so many worlds in the year of
grace 1838."
"In the entire political world, of which you are one of the
leaders."
"They say that it is quite fair, and that sowing so much red,
you ought to reap a little blue."

"Come, come, that is not bad!" said Lucien. "Why do you not
join our party, my dear Beauchamp? With your talents you
"Well, you must allow it is the best thing for the stomach; but
would make your fortune in three or four years."
I hear Beauchamp in the next room; you can dispute together,
and that will pass away the time."
"I only await one thing before following your advice; that is,
a minister who will hold office for six months. My dear
"About what?"
Albert, one word, for I must give poor Lucien a respite. Do
"About the papers."
we breakfast or dine? I must go to the Chamber, for our life
"My dear friend," said Lucien with an air of sovereign is not an idle one."
contempt, "do I ever read the papers?"
"Then you will dispute the more."

"You only breakfast; I await two persons, and the instant
they arrive we shall sit down to table."

163


CHAPTER 40


Chapter 40

"A

nd what sort of persons do you expect to breakfast?"
said Beauchamp.

"A gentleman, and a diplomatist."

THE BREAKFAST

The Breakfast
"for here is Chateau-Renaud, who, to cure you of your mania
for paradoxes, will pass the sword of Renaud de Montauban,
his ancestor, through your body."

"He will sully it then," returned Lucien; "for I am low -- very
"Then we shall have to wait two hours for the gentleman,
low."
and three for the diplomatist. I shall come back to dessert;
keep me some strawberries, coffee, and cigars. I shall take a "Oh, heavens," cried Beauchamp, "the minister quotes
cutlet on my way to the Chamber."
Beranger, what shall we come to next?"
"Do not do anything of the sort; for were the gentleman a
Montmorency, and the diplomatist a Metternich, we will
breakfast at eleven; in the meantime, follow Debray's
example, and take a glass of sherry and a biscuit."

"M. de Chateau-Renaud -- M. Maximilian Morrel," said the
servant, announcing two fresh guests.

but he cannot make him a gentleman, and the Count of
Morcerf is too aristocratic to consent, for the paltry sum of
two million francs, to a mesalliance. The Viscount of Morcerf
can only wed a marchioness."

"Not worth speaking of?" cried Chateau-Renaud; "life is not
worth speaking of! -- that is rather too philosophical, on my
word, Morrel. It is very well for you, who risk your life every
day, but for me, who only did so once" --

"But two million francs make a nice little sum," replied
Morcerf.

"We gather from all this, baron, that Captain Morrel saved
your life."

"It is the social capital of a theatre on the boulevard, or a
railroad from the Jardin des Plantes to La Rapee."

"Exactly so."

"Now, then, to breakfast," said Beauchamp; "for, if I
remember, you told me you only expected two persons,
"Be it so; I will stay; I must do something to distract my Albert."
thoughts."
"Morrel," muttered Albert -- "Morrel -- who is he?" But
"You are like Debray, and yet it seems to me that when the before he had finished, M. de Chateau-Renaud, a handsome
minister is out of spirits, the opposition ought to be joyous."
young man of thirty, gentleman all over, -- that is, with the
figure of a Guiche and the wit of a Mortemart, -- took
"Ah, you do not know with what I am threatened. I shall
Albert's hand. "My dear Albert," said he, "let me introduce to
hear this morning that M. Danglars make a speech at the
you M. Maximilian Morrel, captain of Spahis, my friend; and
Chamber of Deputies, and at his wife's this evening I shall
what is more -- however the man speaks for himself -- my
hear the tragedy of a peer of France. The devil take the
preserver. Salute my hero, viscount." And he stepped on one
constitutional government, and since we had our choice, as
side to give place to a young man of refined and dignified
they say, at least, how could we choose that?"
bearing, with large and open brow, piercing eyes, and black
"I understand; you must lay in a stock of hilarity."
mustache, whom our readers have already seen at Marseilles,
"Do not run down M. Danglars' speeches," said Debray; "he under circumstances sufficiently dramatic not to be forgotten.
A rich uniform, half French, half Oriental, set off his graceful
votes for you, for he belongs to the opposition."
and stalwart figure, and his broad chest was decorated with
"Pardieu, that is exactly the worst of all. I am waiting until the order of the Legion of Honor. The young officer bowed
you send him to speak at the Luxembourg, to laugh at my with easy and elegant politeness. "Monsieur," said Albert
ease."
with affectionate courtesy, "the count of Chateau-Renaud
"My dear friend," said Albert to Beauchamp, "it is plain that knew how much pleasure this introduction would give me;
the affairs of Spain are settled, for you are most desperately you are his friend, be ours also."
out of humor this morning. Recollect that Parisian gossip has "Well said," interrupted Chateau-Renaud; "and pray that, if
spoken of a marriage between myself and Mlle. Eugenie you should ever be in a similar predicament, he may do as
Danglars; I cannot in conscience, therefore, let you run down much for you as he did for me."
the speeches of a man who will one day say to me, `Vicomte,
"What has he done?" asked Albert.
you know I give my daughter two millions.'"
"Ah, this marriage will never take place," said Beauchamp. "Oh, nothing worth speaking of," said Morrel; "M. de
"The king has made him a baron, and can make him a peer, Chateau-Renaud exaggerates."

"Never mind what he says, Morcerf," said Debray, "do you
marry her. You marry a money-bag label, it is true; well, but
what does that matter? It is better to have a blazon less and a
figure more on it. You have seven martlets on your arms;
give three to your wife, and you will still have four; that is
one more than M. de Guise had, who so nearly became King
of France, and whose cousin was Emperor of Germany."
"On my word, I think you are right, Lucien," said Albert
absently.
"To be sure; besides, every millionaire is as noble as a
bastard -- that is, he can be."
"Do not say that, Debray," returned Beauchamp, laughing,
164

"On what occasion?" asked Beauchamp.
"Beauchamp, my good fellow, you know I am starving," said
Debray: "do not set him off on some long story."
"Well, I do not prevent your sitting down to table," replied
Beauchamp, "Chateau-Renaud can tell us while we eat our
breakfast."
"Gentlemen," said Morcerf, "it is only a quarter past ten, and
I expect some one else."
"Ah, true, a diplomatist!" observed Debray.
"Diplomat or not, I don't know; I only know that he charged
himself on my account with a mission, which he terminated
so entirely to my satisfaction, that had I been king, I should

have instantly created him knight of all my orders, even had
I been able to offer him the Golden Fleece and the Garter."

"Not for a stranger," said Debray, "but for a friend I might,
perhaps."

"Well, since we are not to sit down to table," said Debray,
"take a glass of sherry, and tell us all about it."

"I divined that you would become mine, count," replied
Morrel; "besides, as I had the honor to tell you, heroism or
not, sacrifice or not, that day I owed an offering to bad
"You all know that I had the fancy of going to Africa."
fortune in recompense for the favors good fortune had on
"It is a road your ancestors have traced for you," said Albert other days granted to us."
gallantly.
"The history to which M. Morrel alludes," continued
"Yes? but I doubt that your object was like theirs -- to rescue Chateau-Renaud, "is an admirable one, which he will tell
the Holy Sepulchre."
you some day when you are better acquainted with him;
"You are quite right, Beauchamp," observed the young to-day let us fill our stomachs, and not our memories. What
aristocrat. "It was only to fight as an amateur. I cannot bear time do you breakfast, Albert?"
duelling since two seconds, whom I had chosen to arrange
an affair, forced me to break the arm of one of my best
"At half-past ten."
friends, one whom you all know -- poor Franz d'Epinay."
"Precisely?" asked Debray, taking out his watch.
"Ah, true," said Debray, "you did fight some time ago; about
what?"
"Oh, you will give me five minutes' grace," replied Morcerf,
"for I also expect a preserver."
"The devil take me, if I remember," returned
Chateau-Renaud. "But I recollect perfectly one thing, that, "Of whom?"
being unwilling to let such talents as mine sleep, I wished to
"Of myself," cried Morcerf; "parbleu, do you think I cannot
try upon the Arabs the new pistols that had been given to
be saved as well as any one else, and that there are only
me. In consequence I embarked for Oran, and went from
Arabs who cut off heads? Our breakfast is a philanthropic
thence to Constantine, where I arrived just in time to witness
one, and we shall have at table -- at least, I hope so -- two
the raising of the siege. I retreated with the rest, for eight and
benefactors of humanity."
forty hours. I endured the rain during the day, and the cold
during the night tolerably well, but the third morning my "What shall we do?" said Debray; "we have only one
horse died of cold. Poor brute -- accustomed to be covered Monthyon prize."
up and to have a stove in the stable, the Arabian finds "Well, it will be given to some one who has done nothing to
himself unable to bear ten degrees of cold in Arabia."
deserve it," said Beauchamp; "that is the way the Academy
"That's why you want to purchase my English horse," said
Debray, "you think he will bear the cold better."
"You are mistaken, for I have made a vow never to return to
Africa."
"You were very much frightened, then?" asked Beauchamp.
"Well, yes, and I had good reason to be so," replied
Chateau-Renaud. "I was retreating on foot, for my horse was
dead. Six Arabs came up, full gallop, to cut off my head. I
shot two with my double-barrelled gun, and two more with
my pistols, but I was then disarmed, and two were still left;
one seized me by the hair (that is why I now wear it so short,
for no one knows what may happen), the other swung a
yataghan, and I already felt the cold steel on my neck, when
this gentleman whom you see here charged them, shot the
one who held me by the hair, and cleft the skull of the other
with his sabre. He had assigned himself the task of saving a
man's life that day; chance caused that man to be myself.
When I am rich I will order a statue of Chance from
Klagmann or Marochetti."

mostly escapes from the dilemma."
"And where does he come from?" asked Debray. "You have
already answered the question once, but so vaguely that I
venture to put it a second time."
"Really," said Albert, "I do not know; when I invited him
three months ago, he was then at Rome, but since that time
who knows where he may have gone?"
"And you think him capable of being exact?" demanded
Debray.
"I think him capable of everything."
"Well, with the five minutes' grace, we have only ten left."
"I will profit by them to tell you something about my guest."
"I beg pardon," interrupted Beauchamp; "are there any
materials for an article in what you are going to tell us?"
"Yes, and for a most curious one."
"Go on, then, for I see I shall not get to the Chamber this
morning, and I must make up for it."

"Yes," said Morrel, smiling, "it was the 5th of September, the "I was at Rome during the last Carnival."
anniversary of the day on which my father was miraculously
preserved; therefore, as far as it lies in my power, I endeavor "We know that," said Beauchamp.
to celebrate it by some" -"Yes, but what you do not know is that I was carried off by
"Heroic action," interrupted Chateau-Renaud. "I was chosen. bandits."
But that is not all -- after rescuing me from the sword, he "There are no bandits," cried Debray.
rescued me from the cold, not by sharing his cloak with me,
"Yes there are, and most hideous, or rather most admirable
like St. Martin, but by giving me the whole; then from
ones, for I found them ugly enough to frighten me."
hunger by sharing with me -- guess what?"
"Come, my dear Albert," said Debray, "confess that your
"A Strasbourg pie?" asked Beauchamp.
cook is behindhand, that the oysters have not arrived from
"No, his horse; of which we each of us ate a slice with a Ostend or Marennes, and that, like Madame de Maintenon,
hearty appetite. It was very hard."
you are going to replace the dish by a story. Say so at once;
we are sufficiently well-bred to excuse you, and to listen to
"The horse?" said Morcerf, laughing.
your history, fabulous as it promises to be."
"No, the sacrifice," returned Chateau-Renaud; "ask Debray if
"And I say to you, fabulous as it may seem, I tell it as a true
he would sacrifice his English steed for a stranger?"
one from beginning to end. The brigands had carried me
165


CHAPTER 40

off, and conducted me to a gloomy spot, called the
Catacombs of Saint Sebastian."

THE BREAKFAST
They seem like poor fishermen, and suddenly they open
some mysterious cavern filled with the wealth of the Indies."

"I know it," said Chateau-Renaud; "I narrowly escaped "Which means?"
catching a fever there."
"Which means that my Count of Monte Cristo is one of those
"And I did more than that," replied Morcerf, "for I caught fishermen. He has even a name taken from the book, since he
one. I was informed that I was prisoner until I paid the sum calls himself Sinbad the Sailor, and has a cave filled with
of 4,000 Roman crowns -- about 24,000 francs. Unfortunately, gold."
I had not above 1,500. I was at the end of my journey and of
"And you have seen this cavern, Morcerf?" asked
my credit. I wrote to Franz -- and were he here he would
Beauchamp.
confirm every word -- I wrote then to Franz that if he did not
come with the four thousand crowns before six, at ten "No, but Franz has; for heaven's sake, not a word of this
minutes past I should have gone to join the blessed saints before him. Franz went in with his eyes blindfolded, and
and glorious martyrs in whose company I had the honor of was waited on by mutes and by women to whom Cleopatra
being; and Signor Luigi Vampa, such was the name of the was a painted strumpet. Only he is not quite sure about the
chief of these bandits, would have scrupulously kept his women, for they did not come in until after he had taken
hashish, so that what he took for women might have been
word."
simply a row of statues."
"But Franz did come with the four thousand crowns," said
Chateau-Renaud. "A man whose name is Franz d'Epinay or The two young men looked at Morcerf as if to say, -- "Are
Albert de Morcerf has not much difficulty in procuring you mad, or are you laughing at us?"
them."
"And I also," said Morrel thoughtfully, "have heard
"No, he arrived accompanied simply by the guest I am going
to present to you."
"Ah, this gentleman is a Hercules killing Cacus, a Perseus
freeing Andromeda."
"No, he is a man about my own size."
"Armed to the teeth?"
"He had not even a knitting-needle."
"But he paid your ransom?"
"He said two words to the chief and I was free."
"And they apologized to him for having carried you off?"
said Beauchamp.
"Just so."
"Why, he is a second Ariosto."
"No, his name is the Count of Monte Cristo."
"There is no Count of Monte Cristo" said Debray.

something like this from an old sailor named Penelon."
"Ah," cried Albert, "it is very lucky that M. Morrel comes to
aid me; you are vexed, are you not, that he thus gives a clew
to the labyrinth?"
"My dear Albert," said Debray, "what you tell us is so
extraordinary."
"Ah, because your ambassadors and your consuls do not tell
you of them -- they have no time. They are too much taken
up with interfering in the affairs of their countrymen who
travel."
"Now you get angry, and attack our poor agents. How will
you have them protect you? The Chamber cuts down their
salaries every day, so that now they have scarcely any. Will
you be ambassador, Albert? I will send you to
Constantinople."
"No, lest on the first demonstration I make in favor of
Mehemet Ali, the Sultan send me the bowstring, and make
my secretaries strangle me."

"I do not think so," added Chateau-Renaud, with the air of a "You say very true," responded Debray.
man who knows the whole of the European nobility
"Yes," said Albert, "but this has nothing to do with the
perfectly.
existence of the Count of Monte Cristo."
"Does any one know anything of a Count of Monte Cristo?"
"Pardieu, every one exists."
"He comes possibly from the Holy Land, and one of his
ancestors possessed Calvary, as the Mortemarts did the "Doubtless, but not in the same way; every one has not black
slaves, a princely retinue, an arsenal of weapons that would
Dead Sea."
do credit to an Arabian fortress, horses that cost six
"I think I can assist your researches," said Maximilian. thousand francs apiece, and Greek mistresses."
"Monte Cristo is a little island I have often heard spoken of
by the old sailors my father employed -- a grain of sand in "Have you seen the Greek mistress?"
the centre of the Mediterranean, an atom in the infinite."
"I have both seen and heard her. I saw her at the theatre, and
"Precisely!" cried Albert. "Well, he of whom I speak is the heard her one morning when I breakfasted with the count."
lord and master of this grain of sand, of this atom; he has "He eats, then?"
purchased the title of count somewhere in Tuscany."
"Yes; but so little, it can hardly be called eating."
"He is rich, then?"
"He must be a vampire."
"I believe so."
"Laugh, if you will; the Countess G---- , who knew Lord
"But that ought to be visible."
Ruthven, declared that the count was a vampire."
"That is what deceives you, Debray."
"I do not understand you."
"Have you read the `Arabian Nights'?"
"What a question!"
"Well, do you know if the persons you see there are rich or
poor, if their sacks of wheat are not rubies or diamonds?
166

"Ah, capital," said Beauchamp. "For a man not connected
with newspapers, here is the pendant to the famous
sea-serpent of the Constitutionnel."
"Wild eyes, the iris of which contracts or dilates at pleasure,"
said Debray; "facial angle strongly developed, magnificent
forehead, livid complexion, black beard, sharp and white
teeth, politeness unexceptionable."

"Just so, Lucien," returned Morcerf; "you have described him
feature for feature. Yes, keen and cutting politeness. This
man has often made me shudder; and one day that we were
viewing an execution, I thought I should faint, more from
hearing the cold and calm manner in which he spoke of
every description of torture, than from the sight of the
executioner and the culprit."

voice to vibrate so deeply, and what made his eye flash,
which was in general so clear, lustrous, and limpid when he
pleased. "You have never seen our Africans, count?" said
Albert. "Never," replied the count, who was by this time
perfectly master of himself again.
"Well, beneath this uniform beats one of the bravest and
noblest hearts in the whole army."

"Did he not conduct you to the ruins of the Colosseum and
"Oh, M. de Morcerf," interrupted Morrel.
suck your blood?" asked Beauchamp.
"Let me go on, captain. And we have just heard," continued
"Or, having delivered you, make you sign a flaming
Albert, "of a new deed of his, and so heroic a one, that,
parchment, surrendering your soul to him as Esau did his
although I have seen him to-day for the first time, I request
birth-right?"
you to allow me to introduce him as my friend." At these
"Rail on, rail on at your ease, gentlemen," said Morcerf, words it was still possible to observe in Monte Cristo the
somewhat piqued. "When I look at you Parisians, idlers on concentrated look, changing color, and slight trembling of
the Boulevard de Gand or the Bois de Boulogne, and think of the eyelid that show emotion. "Ah, you have a noble heart,"
this man, it seems to me we are not of the same race."
said the count; "so much the better." This exclamation, which
corresponded to the count's own thought rather than to what
"I am highly flattered," returned Beauchamp. "At the same
Albert was saying, surprised everybody, and especially
time," added Chateau-Renaud, "your Count of Monte Cristo
Morrel, who looked at Monte Cristo with wonder. But, at the
is a very fine fellow, always excepting his little arrangements
same time, the intonation was so soft that, however strange
with the Italian banditti."
the speech might seem, it was impossible to be offended at it.
"There are no Italian banditti," said Debray.
"Why should he doubt it?" said Beauchamp to
"No vampire," cried Beauchamp. "No Count of Monte Chateau-Renaud.
Cristo" added Debray. "There is half-past ten striking,
Albert."

"In reality," replied the latter, who, with his aristocratic
glance and his knowledge of the world, had penetrated at
"Confess you have dreamed this, and let us sit down to once all that was penetrable in Monte Cristo, "Albert has not
breakfast," continued Beauchamp. But the sound of the clock deceived us, for the count is a most singular being. What say
had not died away when Germain announced, "His you, Morrel!"
excellency the Count of Monte Cristo." The involuntary start
every one gave proved how much Morcerf's narrative had
"Ma foi, he has an open look about him that pleases me, in
impressed them, and Albert himself could not wholly refrain
spite of the singular remark he has made about me."
from manifesting sudden emotion. He had not heard a
carriage stop in the street, or steps in the ante-chamber; the "Gentlemen," said Albert, "Germain informs me that
door had itself opened noiselessly. The count appeared, breakfast is ready. My dear count, allow me to show you the
dressed with the greatest simplicity, but the most fastidious way." They passed silently into the breakfast-room, and
dandy could have found nothing to cavil at in his toilet. every one took his place. "Gentleman," said the count,
Every article of dress -- hat, coat, gloves, and boots -- was seating himself, "permit me to make a confession which
from the first makers. He seemed scarcely five and thirty. must form my excuse for any improprieties I may commit. I
But what struck everybody was his extreme resemblance to am a stranger, and a stranger to such a degree, that this is the
the portrait Debray had drawn. The count advanced, smiling, first time I have ever been at Paris. The French way of living
into the centre of the room, and approached Albert, who is utterly unknown to me, and up to the present time I have
hastened towards him holding out his hand in a ceremonial followed the Eastern customs, which are entirely in contrast
manner. "Punctuality," said Monte Cristo, "is the politeness to the Parisian. I beg you, therefore, to excuse if you find
of kings, according to one of your sovereigns, I think; but it anything in me too Turkish, too Italian, or too Arabian. Now,
is not the same with travellers. However, I hope you will then, let us breakfast."
excuse the two or three seconds I am behindhand; five
"With what an air he says all this," muttered Beauchamp;
hundred leagues are not to be accomplished without some
"decidedly he is a great man."
trouble, and especially in France, where, it seems, it is
"A great man in his own country," added Debray.
forbidden to beat the postilions."
"My dear count," replied Albert, "I was announcing your
visit to some of my friends, whom I had invited in
consequence of the promise you did me the honor to make,
and whom I now present to you. They are the Count of
Chateau-Renaud, whose nobility goes back to the twelve
peers, and whose ancestors had a place at the Round Table;
M. Lucien Debray, private secretary to the minister of the
interior; M. Beauchamp, an editor of a paper, and the terror
of the French government, but of whom, in spite of his
national celebrity, you perhaps have not heard in Italy, since
his paper is prohibited there; and M. Maximilian Morrel,
captain of Spahis."

"A great man in every country, M. Debray," said
Chateau-Renaud. The count was, it may be remembered, a
most temperate guest. Albert remarked this, expressing his
fears lest, at the outset, the Parisian mode of life should
displease the traveller in the most essential point. "My dear
count," said he, "I fear one thing, and that is, that the fare of
the Rue du Helder is not so much to your taste as that of the
Piazza di Spagni. I ought to have consulted you on the point,
and have had some dishes prepared expressly."

"Did you know me better," returned the count, smiling, "you
would not give one thought of such a thing for a traveller
like myself, who has successively lived on maccaroni at
At this name the count, who had hitherto saluted every one Naples, polenta at Milan, olla podrida at Valencia, pilau at
with courtesy, but at the same time with coldness and Constantinople, karrick in India, and swallows' nests in
formality, stepped a pace forward, and a slight tinge of red China. I eat everywhere, and of everything, only I eat but
colored his pale cheeks. "You wear the uniform of the new little; and to-day, that you reproach me with my want of
French conquerors, monsieur," said he; "it is a handsome appetite, is my day of appetite, for I have not eaten since
uniform." No one could have said what caused the count's
167


CHAPTER 40

yesterday morning."
"What," cried all the guests, "you have not eaten for four and
twenty hours?"
"No," replied the count; "I was forced to go out of my road to
obtain some information near Nimes, so that I was
somewhat late, and therefore I did not choose to stop."
"And you ate in your carriage?" asked Morcerf.
"No, I slept, as I generally do when I am weary without
having the courage to amuse myself, or when I am hungry
without feeling inclined to eat."
"But you can sleep when you please, monsieur?" said Morrel.

THE BREAKFAST
evident he spoke the truth, or that he was mad. However,
the sight of the emerald made them naturally incline to the
former belief. "And what did these two sovereigns give you
in exchange for these magnificent presents?" asked Debray.
"The Sultan, the liberty of a woman," replied the Count; "the
Pope, the life of a man; so that once in my life I have been as
powerful as if heaven had brought me into the world on the
steps of a throne."
"And it was Peppino you saved, was it not?" cried Morcerf;
"it was for him that you obtained pardon?"
"Perhaps," returned the count, smiling.

"My dear count, you have no idea what pleasure it gives me
to hear you speak thus," said Morcerf. "I had announced you
beforehand to my friends as an enchanter of the `Arabian
"You have a recipe for it?"
Nights,' a wizard of the Middle Ages; but the Parisians are so
"An infallible one."
subtle in paradoxes that they mistake for caprices of the
"That would be invaluable to us in Africa, who have not imagination the most incontestable truths, when these truths
do not form a part of their daily existence. For example, here
always any food to eat, and rarely anything to drink."
is Debray who reads, and Beauchamp who prints, every day,
"Yes," said Monte Cristo; "but, unfortunately, a recipe
`A member of the Jockey Club has been stopped and robbed
excellent for a man like myself would be very dangerous
on the Boulevard;' `four persons have been assassinated in
applied to an army, which might not awake when it was
the Rue St. Denis' or `the Faubourg St. Germain;' `ten, fifteen,
needed."
or twenty thieves, have been arrested in a cafe on the
"May we inquire what is this recipe?" asked Debray.
Boulevard du Temple, or in the Thermes de Julien,' -- and
"Oh, yes," returned Monte Cristo; "I make no secret of it. It is yet these same men deny the existence of the bandits in the
a mixture of excellent opium, which I fetched myself from Maremma, the Campagna di Romana, or the Pontine
Canton in order to have it pure, and the best hashish which Marshes. Tell them yourself that I was taken by bandits, and
grows in the East -- that is, between the Tigris and the that without your generous intercession I should now have
Euphrates. These two ingredients are mixed in equal been sleeping in the Catacombs of St. Sebastian, instead of
proportions, and formed into pills. Ten minutes after one is receiving them in my humble abode in the Rue du Helder."
taken, the effect is produced. Ask Baron Franz d'Epinay; I "Ah," said Monte Cristo "you promised me never to mention
think he tasted them one day."
that circumstance."
"Yes."

"Yes," replied Morcerf, "he said something about it to me."

"It was not I who made that promise," cried Morcerf; "it must
"But," said Beauchamp, who, as became a journalist, was have been some one else whom you have rescued in the
same manner, and whom you have forgotten. Pray speak of
very incredulous, "you always carry this drug about you?"
it, for I shall not only, I trust, relate the little I do know, but
"Always."
also a great deal I do not know."
"Would it be an indiscretion to ask to see those precious "It seems to me," returned the count, smiling, "that you
pills?" continued Beauchamp, hoping to take him at a played a sufficiently important part to know as well as
disadvantage.
myself what happened."
"No, monsieur," returned the count; and he drew from his
pocket a marvellous casket, formed out of a single emerald
and closed by a golden lid which unscrewed and gave
passage to a small greenish colored pellet about the size of a
pea. This ball had an acrid and penetrating odor. There were
four or five more in the emerald, which would contain about
a dozen. The casket passed around the table, but it was more
to examine the admirable emerald than to see the pills that it
passed from hand to hand. "And is it your cook who
prepares these pills?" asked Beauchamp.

"Well, you promise me, if I tell all I know, to relate, in your
turn, all that I do not know?"
"That is but fair," replied Monte Cristo.

"Well," said Morcerf, "for three days I believed myself the
object of the attentions of a masque, whom I took for a
descendant of Tullia or Poppoea, while I was simply the
object of the attentions of a contadina, and I say contadina to
avoid saying peasant girl. What I know is, that, like a fool, a
greater fool than he of whom I spoke just now, I mistook for
"Oh, no, monsieur," replied Monte Cristo; "I do not thus this peasant girl a young bandit of fifteen or sixteen, with a
betray my enjoyments to the vulgar. I am a tolerable chemist, beardless chin and slim waist, and who, just as I was about
to imprint a chaste salute on his lips, placed a pistol to my
and prepare my pills myself."
head, and, aided by seven or eight others, led, or rather
"This is a magnificent emerald, and the largest I have ever dragged me, to the Catacombs of St. Sebastian, where I
seen," said Chateau-Renaud, "although my mother has some found a highly educated brigand chief perusing Caesar's
remarkable family jewels."
`Commentaries,' and who deigned to leave off reading to
"I had three similar ones," returned Monte Cristo. "I gave one inform me, that unless the next morning, before six o'clock,
to the Sultan, who mounted it in his sabre; another to our four thousand piastres were paid into his account at his
holy father the Pope, who had it set in his tiara, opposite to banker's, at a quarter past six I should have ceased to exist.
one nearly as large, though not so fine, given by the Emperor The letter is still to be seen, for it is in Franz d'Epinay's
Napoleon to his predecessor, Pius VII. I kept the third for possession, signed by me, and with a postscript of M. Luigi
myself, and I had it hollowed out, which reduced its value, Vampa. This is all I know, but I know not, count, how you
but rendered it more commodious for the purpose I contrived to inspire so much respect in the bandits of Rome
intended." Every one looked at Monte Cristo with who ordinarily have so little respect for anything. I assure
astonishment; he spoke with so much simplicity that it was you, Franz and I were lost in admiration."
168

"Nothing more simple," returned the count. "I had known
the famous Vampa for more than ten years. When he was
quite a child, and only a shepherd, I gave him a few gold
pieces for showing me my way, and he, in order to repay me,
gave me a poniard, the hilt of which he had carved with his
own hand, and which you may have seen in my collection of
arms. In after years, whether he had forgotten this
interchange of presents, which ought to have cemented our
friendship, or whether he did not recollect me, he sought to
take me, but, on the contrary, it was I who captured him and
a dozen of his band. I might have handed him over to
Roman justice, which is somewhat expeditious, and which
would have been particularly so with him; but I did nothing
of the sort -- I suffered him and his band to depart."
"With the condition that they should sin no more," said
Beauchamp, laughing. "I see they kept their promise."
"No, monsieur," returned Monte Cristo "upon the simple
condition that they should respect myself and my friends.
Perhaps what I am about to say may seem strange to you,
who are socialists, and vaunt humanity and your duty to
your neighbor, but I never seek to protect a society which
does not protect me, and which I will even say, generally
occupies itself about me only to injure me; and thus by
giving them a low place in my esteem, and preserving a
neutrality towards them, it is society and my neighbor who
are indebted to me."
"Bravo," cried Chateau-Renaud; "you are the first man I ever
met sufficiently courageous to preach egotism. Bravo, count,
bravo!"

reality, and you must submit to it under penalty of breaking
your word."
"I will keep it," returned Morcerf; "but I fear that you will be
much disappointed, accustomed as you are to picturesque
events and fantastic horizons. Amongst us you will not meet
with any of those episodes with which your adventurous
existence has so familiarized you; our Chimborazo is
Mortmartre, our Himalaya is Mount Valerien, our Great
Desert is the plain of Grenelle, where they are now boring an
artesian well to water the caravans. We have plenty of
thieves, though not so many as is said; but these thieves
stand in far more dread of a policeman than a lord. France is
so prosaic, and Paris so civilized a city, that you will not find
in its eighty-five departments -- I say eighty-five, because I
do not include Corsica -- you will not find, then, in these
eighty-five departments a single hill on which there is not a
telegraph, or a grotto in which the commissary of police has
not put up a gaslamp. There is but one service I can render
you, and for that I place myself entirely at your orders, that
is, to present, or make my friends present, you everywhere;
besides, you have no need of any one to introduce you -with your name, and your fortune, and your talent" (Monte
Cristo bowed with a somewhat ironical smile) "you can
present yourself everywhere, and be well received. I can be
useful in one way only -- if knowledge of Parisian habits, of
the means of rendering yourself comfortable, or of the
bazaars, can assist, you may depend upon me to find you a
fitting dwelling here. I do not dare offer to share my
apartments with you, as I shared yours at Rome -- I, who do
not profess egotism, but am yet egotist par excellence; for,
except myself, these rooms would not hold a shadow more,
unless that shadow were feminine."

"It is frank, at least," said Morrel. "But I am sure that the
count does not regret having once deviated from the
principles he has so boldly avowed."
"Ah," said the count, "that is a most conjugal reservation; I
"How have I deviated from those principles, monsieur?" recollect that at Rome you said something of a projected
asked Monte Cristo, who could not help looking at Morrel marriage. May I congratulate you?"
with so much intensity, that two or three times the young
man had been unable to sustain that clear and piercing
glance.
"Why, it seems to me," replied Morrel, "that in delivering M.
de Morcerf, whom you did not know, you did good to your
neighbor and to society."
"Of which he is the brightest ornament," said Beauchamp,
drinking off a glass of champagne.
"My dear count," cried Morcerf, "you are at fault -- you, one
of the most formidable logicians I know -- and you must see
it clearly proved that instead of being an egotist, you are a
philanthropist. Ah, you call yourself Oriental, a Levantine,
Maltese, Indian, Chinese; your family name is Monte Cristo;
Sinbad the Sailor is your baptismal appellation, and yet the
first day you set foot in Paris you instinctively display the
greatest virtue, or rather the chief defect, of us eccentric
Parisians, -- that is, you assume the vices you have not, and
conceal the virtues you possess."
"My dear vicomte," returned Monte Cristo, "I do not see, in
all I have done, anything that merits, either from you or
these gentlemen, the pretended eulogies I have received.
You were no stranger to me, for I knew you from the time I
gave up two rooms to you, invited you to breakfast with me,
lent you one of my carriages, witnessed the Carnival in your
company, and saw with you from a window in the Piazza
del Popolo the execution that affected you so much that you
nearly fainted. I will appeal to any of these gentlemen, could
I leave my guest in the hands of a hideous bandit, as you
term him? Besides, you know, I had the idea that you could
introduce me into some of the Paris salons when I came to
France. You might some time ago have looked upon this
resolution as a vague project, but to-day you see it was a

"The affair is still in projection."
"And he who says in `projection,' means already decided,"
said Debray.
"No," replied Morcerf, "my father is most anxious about it;
and I hope, ere long, to introduce you, if not to my wife, at
least to my betrothed -- Mademoiselle Eugenie Danglars."
"Eugenie Danglars," said Monte Cristo; "tell me, is not her
father Baron Danglars?"
"Yes," returned Morcerf, "a baron of a new creation."
"What matter," said Monte Cristo "if he has rendered the
State services which merit this distinction?"
"Enormous ones," answered Beauchamp. "Although in
reality a Liberal, he negotiated a loan of six millions for
Charles X., in 1829, who made him a baron and chevalier of
the Legion of Honor; so that he wears the ribbon, not, as you
would think, in his waistcoat-pocket, but at his button-hole."
"Ah," interrupted Morcerf, laughing, "Beauchamp,
Beauchamp, keep that for the Corsaire or the Charivari, but
spare my future father-in-law before me." Then, turning to
Monte Cristo, "You just now spoke his name as if you knew
the baron?"
"I do not know him," returned Monte Cristo; "but I shall
probably soon make his acquaintance, for I have a credit
opened with him by the house of Richard & Blount, of
London, Arstein & Eskeles of Vienna, and Thomson &
French at Rome." As he pronounced the two last names, the
count glanced at Maximilian Morrel. If the stranger expected
to produce an effect on Morrel, he was not mistaken -Maximilian started as if he had been electrified. "Thomson &
169


CHAPTER 40

French," said he; "do you know this house, monsieur?"
"They are my bankers in the capital of the Christian world,"
returned the count quietly. "Can my influence with them be
of any service to you?"

THE BREAKFAST
"Parbleu, at Rome you spent fifty thousand piastres in
furnishing your apartments, but I presume that you are not
disposed to spend a similar sum every day."

"It is not that which deterred me," replied Monte Cristo; "but
as I determined to have a house to myself, I sent on my valet
"Oh, count, you could assist me perhaps in researches which
de chambre, and he ought by this time to have bought the
have been, up to the present, fruitless. This house, in past
house and furnished it."
years, did ours a great service, and has, I know not for what
reason, always denied having rendered us this service."
"But you have, then, a valet de chambre who knows Paris?"
said Beauchamp.
"I shall be at your orders," said Monte Cristo bowing.
"It is the first time he has ever been in Paris. He is black, and
"But," continued Morcerf, "a propos of Danglars, -- we have
cannot speak," returned Monte Cristo.
strangely wandered from the subject. We were speaking of a
suitable habitation for the Count of Monte Cristo. Come, "It is Ali!" cried Albert, in the midst of the general surprise.
gentlemen, let us all propose some place. Where shall we
"Yes, Ali himself, my Nubian mute, whom you saw, I think,
lodge this new guest in our great capital?"
at Rome."
"Faubourg Saint-Germain," said Chateau-Renaud. "The
"Certainly," said Morcerf; "I recollect him perfectly. But how
count will find there a charming hotel, with a court and
could you charge a Nubian to purchase a house, and a mute
garden."
to furnish it? -- he will do everything wrong."
"Bah, Chateau-Renaud," returned Debray, "you only know
"Undeceive yourself, monsieur," replied Monte Cristo; "I am
your dull and gloomy Faubourg Saint-Germain; do not pay
quite sure, that, on the contrary, he will choose everything as
any attention to him, count -- live in the Chaussee d'Antin,
I wish. He knows my tastes, my caprices, my wants. He has
that's the real centre of Paris."
been here a week, with the instinct of a hound, hunting by
"Boulevard de l'Opera," said Beauchamp; "the second floor -- himself. He will arrange everything for me. He knew, that I
a house with a balcony. The count will have his cushions of should arrive to-day at ten o'clock; he was waiting for me at
silver cloth brought there, and as he smokes his chibouque, nine at the Barriere de Fontainebleau. He gave me this paper;
see all Paris pass before him."
it contains the number of my new abode; read it yourself,"
and Monte Cristo passed a paper to Albert. "Ah, that is really
"You have no idea, then, Morrel?" asked Chateau-Renaud;
original," said Beauchamp.
"you do not propose anything."
"And very princely," added Chateau-Renaud.
"Oh, yes," returned the young man, smiling; "on the contrary,
I have one, but I expected the count would be tempted by "What, do you not know your house?" asked Debray.
one of the brilliant proposals made him, yet as he has not
"No," said Monte Cristo; "I told you I did not wish to be
replied to any of them, I will venture to offer him a suite of
behind my time; I dressed myself in the carriage, and
apartments in a charming hotel, in the Pompadour style, that
descended at the viscount's door." The young men looked at
my sister has inhabited for a year, in the Rue Meslay."
each other; they did not know if it was a comedy Monte
"You have a sister?" asked the count.
Cristo was playing, but every word he uttered had such an
air of simplicity, that it was impossible to suppose what he
"Yes, monsieur, a most excellent sister."
said was false -- besides, why should he tell a falsehood?
"Married?"
"We must content ourselves, then," said Beauchamp, "with
rendering the count all the little services in our power. I, in
"Nearly nine years."
my quality of journalist, open all the theatres to him."
"Happy?" asked the count again.
"Thanks, monsieur," returned Monte Cristo, "my steward has
"As happy as it is permitted to a human creature to be," orders to take a box at each theatre."
replied Maximilian. "She married the man she loved, who
remained faithful to us in our fallen fortunes -- Emmanuel "Is your steward also a Nubian?" asked Debray.
Herbaut." Monte Cristo smiled imperceptibly. "I live there "No, he is a countryman of yours, if a Corsican is a
during my leave of absence," continued Maximilian; "and I countryman of any one's. But you know him, M. de
shall be, together with my brother-in-law Emmanuel, at the Morcerf."
disposition of the Count, whenever he thinks fit to honor us."
"Is it that excellent M. Bertuccio, who understands hiring
"One minute," cried Albert, without giving Monte Cristo the windows so well?"
time to reply. "Take care, you are going to immure a traveller,
"Yes, you saw him the day I had the honor of receiving you;
Sinbad the Sailor, a man who comes to see Paris; you are
he has been a soldier, a smuggler -- in fact, everything. I
going to make a patriarch of him."
would not be quite sure that he has not been mixed up with
"Oh, no," said Morrel; "my sister is five and twenty, my the police for some trifle -- a stab with a knife, for instance."
brother-in-law is thirty, they are gay, young, and happy.
"And you have chosen this honest citizen for your steward,"
Besides, the count will be in his own house, and only see
said Debray. "Of how much does he rob you every year?"
them when he thinks fit to do so."
"On my word," replied the count, "not more than another. I
"Thanks, monsieur," said Monte Cristo; "I shall content
am sure he answers my purpose, knows no impossibility,
myself with being presented to your sister and her husband,
and so I keep him."
if you will do me the honor to introduce me; but I cannot
accept the offer of any one of these gentlemen, since my "Then," continued Chateau-Renaud, "since you have an
habitation is already prepared."
establishment, a steward, and a hotel in the Champs Elysees,
you only want a mistress." Albert smiled. He thought of the
"What," cried Morcerf; "you are, then, going to an hotel -fair Greek he had seen in the count's box at the Argentina
that will be very dull for you."
and Valle theatres. "I have something better than that," said
"Was I so badly lodged at Rome?" said Monte Cristo smiling. Monte Cristo; "I have a slave. You procure your mistresses
170

from the opera, the Vaudeville, or the Varietes; I purchased "Take care," returned Albert; "no one has been able to
mine at Constantinople; it cost me more, but I have nothing accomplish that."
to fear."
"Oh, we have three millions for our police; it is true they are
"But you forget," replied Debray, laughing, "that we are almost always spent beforehand, but, no matter, we shall
Franks by name and franks by nature, as King Charles said, still have fifty thousand francs to spend for this purpose."
and that the moment she puts her foot in France your slave
"And when you know, will you tell me?"
becomes free."
"I promise you. Au revoir, Albert. Gentlemen, good
"Who will tell her?"
morning."
"The first person who sees her."
As he left the room, Debray called out loudly, "My carriage."
"She only speaks Romaic."
"Bravo," said Beauchamp to Albert; "I shall not go to the
"That is different."
Chamber, but I have something better to offer my readers
than a speech of M. Danglars."
"But at least we shall see her," said Beauchamp, "or do you
keep eunuchs as well as mutes?"
"For heaven's sake, Beauchamp," returned Morcerf, "do not
deprive me of the merit of introducing him everywhere. Is
"Oh, no," replied Monte Cristo; "I do not carry brutalism so
he not peculiar?"
far. Every one who surrounds me is free to quit me, and
when they leave me will no longer have any need of me or "He is more than that," replied Chateau-Renaud; "he is one of
any one else; it is for that reason, perhaps, that they do not the most extraordinary men I ever saw in my life. Are you
quit me." They had long since passed to dessert and cigars.
coming, Morrel?"
"My dear Albert," said Debray, rising, "it is half-past two.
Your guest is charming, but you leave the best company to
go into the worst sometimes. I must return to the minister's. I
will tell him of the count, and we shall soon know who he
is."

"Directly I have given my card to the count, who has
promised to pay us a visit at Rue Meslay, No. 14."
"Be sure I shall not fail to do so," returned the count, bowing.
And Maximilian Morrel left the room with the Baron de
Chateau-Renaud, leaving Monte Cristo alone with Morcerf.A

171


CHAPTER 41


Chapter 41

W

THE PRESENTATION

The Presentation

hen Albert found himself alone with Monte Cristo,
"My dear count," said he, "allow me to commence my
services as cicerone by showing you a specimen of a
bachelor's apartment. You, who are accustomed to the
palaces of Italy, can amuse yourself by calculating in how
many square feet a young man who is not the worst lodged
in Paris can live. As we pass from one room to another, I will
open the windows to let you breathe." Monte Cristo had
already seen the breakfast-room and the salon on the
ground-floor. Albert led him first to his atelier, which was,
as we have said, his favorite apartment. Monte Cristo
quickly appreciated all that Albert had collected here -- old
cabinets, Japanese porcelain, Oriental stuffs, Venetian glass,
arms from all parts of the world -- everything was familiar to
him; and at the first glance he recognized their date, their
country, and their origin. Morcerf had expected he should be
the guide; on the contrary, it was he who, under the count's
guidance, followed a course of archaeology, mineralogy, and
natural history. They descended to the first floor; Albert led
his guest into the salon. The salon was filled with the works
of modern artists; there were landscapes by Dupre, with
their long reeds and tall trees, their lowing oxen and
marvellous skies; Delacroix's Arabian cavaliers, with their
long white burnouses, their shining belts, their damasked
arms, their horses, who tore each other with their teeth while
their riders contended fiercely with their maces; aquarelles
of Boulanger, representing Notre Dame de Paris with that
vigor that makes the artist the rival of the poet; there were
paintings by Diaz, who makes his flowers more beautiful
than flowers, his suns more brilliant than the sun; designs by
Decamp, as vividly colored as those of Salvator Rosa, but
more poetic; pastels by Giraud and Muller, representing
children like angels and women with the features of a virgin;
sketches torn from the album of Dauzats' "Travels in the
East," that had been made in a few seconds on the saddle of
a camel, or beneath the dome of a mosque -- in a word, all
that modern art can give in exchange and as recompense for
the art lost and gone with ages long since past.

the count in a perfectly calm tone; "and this costume -- a ball
costume, doubtless -- becomes her admirably."
"Ah, monsieur," returned Albert, "I would never forgive you
this mistake if you had seen another picture beside this. You
do not know my mother; she it is whom you see here. She
had her portrait painted thus six or eight years ago. This
costume is a fancy one, it appears, and the resemblance is so
great that I think I still see my mother the same as she was in
1830. The countess had this portrait painted during the
count's absence. She doubtless intended giving him an
agreeable surprise; but, strange to say, this portrait seemed
to displease my father, and the value of the picture, which is,
as you see, one of the best works of Leopold Robert, could
not overcome his dislike to it. It is true, between ourselves,
that M. de Morcerf is one of the most assiduous peers at the
Luxembourg, a general renowned for theory, but a most
mediocre amateur of art. It is different with my mother, who
paints exceedingly well, and who, unwilling to part with so
valuable a picture, gave it to me to put here, where it would
be less likely to displease M. de Morcerf, whose portrait, by
Gros, I will also show you. Excuse my talking of family
matters, but as I shall have the honor of introducing you to
the count, I tell you this to prevent you making any allusions
to this picture. The picture seems to have a malign influence,
for my mother rarely comes here without looking at it, and
still more rarely does she look at it without weeping. This
disagreement is the only one that has ever taken place
between the count and countess, who are still as much
united, although married more than twenty years, as on the
first day of their wedding."
Monte Cristo glanced rapidly at Albert, as if to seek a hidden
meaning in his words, but it was evident the young man
uttered them in the simplicity of his heart. "Now," said
Albert, "that you have seen all my treasures, allow me to
offer them to you, unworthy as they are. Consider yourself
as in your own house, and to put yourself still more at your
ease, pray accompany me to the apartments of M. de
Morcerf, he whom I wrote from Rome an account of the
services you rendered me, and to whom I announced your
promised visit, and I may say that both the count and
countess anxiously desire to thank you in person. You are
somewhat blase I know, and family scenes have not much
effect on Sinbad the Sailor, who has seen so many others.
However, accept what I propose to you as an initiation into
Parisian life -- a life of politeness, visiting, and
introductions." Monte Cristo bowed without making any
answer; he accepted the offer without enthusiasm and
without regret, as one of those conventions of society which
every gentleman looks upon as a duty. Albert summoned his
servant, and ordered him to acquaint M. and Madame de
Morcerf of the arrival of the Count of Monte Cristo. Albert
followed him with the count. When they arrived at the
ante-chamber, above the door was visible a shield, which, by
its rich ornaments and its harmony with the rest of the
furniture, indicated the importance the owner attached to
this blazon. Monte Cristo stopped and examined it
attentively.

Albert expected to have something new this time to show to
the traveller, but, to his great surprise, the latter, without
seeking for the signatures, many of which, indeed, were only
initials, named instantly the author of every picture in such a
manner that it was easy to see that each name was not only
known to him, but that each style associated with it had been
appreciated and studied by him. From the salon they passed
into the bed-chamber; it was a model of taste and simple
elegance. A single portrait, signed by Leopold Robert, shone
in its carved and gilded frame. This portrait attracted the
Count of Monte Cristo's attention, for he made three rapid
steps in the chamber, and stopped suddenly before it. It was
the portrait of a young woman of five or six and twenty,
with a dark complexion, and light and lustrous eyes, veiled
beneath long lashes. She wore the picturesque costume of
the Catalan fisherwomen, a red and black bodice, and
golden pins in her hair. She was looking at the sea, and her
form was outlined on the blue ocean and sky. The light was
so faint in the room that Albert did not perceive the pallor
that spread itself over the count's visage, or the nervous
heaving of his chest and shoulders. Silence prevailed for an "Azure seven merlets, or, placed bender," said he. "These are,
instant, during which Monte Cristo gazed intently on the doubtless, your family arms? Except the knowledge of
blazons, that enables me to decipher them, I am very
picture.
ignorant of heraldry -- I, a count of a fresh creation,
"You have there a most charming mistress, viscount," said
fabricated in Tuscany by the aid of a commandery of St.
172

Stephen, and who would not have taken the trouble had I
not been told that when you travel much it is necessary.
Besides, you must have something on the panels of your
carriage, to escape being searched by the custom-house
officers. Excuse my putting such a question to you."

Count of Monte Cristo, the generous friend whom I had the
good fortune to meet in the critical situation of which I have
told you."

"You are most welcome, monsieur," said the Count of
Morcerf, saluting Monte Cristo with a smile, "and monsieur
"It is not indiscreet," returned Morcerf, with the simplicity of has rendered our house, in preserving its only heir, a service
conviction. "You have guessed rightly. These are our arms, which insures him our eternal gratitude." As he said these
that is, those of my father, but they are, as you see, joined to words, the count of Morcerf pointed to a chair, while he
another shield, which has gules, a silver tower, which are my seated himself in another opposite the window.
mother's. By her side I am Spanish, but the family of Morcerf
Monte Cristo, in taking the seat Morcerf offered him, placed
is French, and, I have heard, one of the oldest of the south of
himself in such a manner as to remain concealed in the
France."
shadow of the large velvet curtains, and read on the
"Yes," replied Monte Cristo "these blazons prove that. careworn and livid features of the count a whole history of
Almost all the armed pilgrims that went to the Holy Land secret griefs written in each wrinkle time had planted there.
took for their arms either a cross, in honor of their mission, "The countess," said Morcerf, "was at her toilet when she was
or birds of passage, in sign of the long voyage they were informed of the visit she was about to receive. She will,
about to undertake, and which they hoped to accomplish on however, be in the salon in ten minutes."
the wings of faith. One of your ancestors had joined the
"It is a great honor to me," returned Monte Cristo, "to be thus,
Crusades, and supposing it to be only that of St. Louis, that
on the first day of my arrival in Paris, brought in contact
makes you mount to the thirteenth century, which is
with a man whose merit equals his reputation, and to whom
tolerably ancient."
fortune has for once been equitable, but has she not still on
"It is possible," said Morcerf; "my father has in his study a the plains of Metidja, or in the mountains of Atlas, a
genealogical tree which will tell you all that, and on which I marshal's staff to offer you?"
made commentaries that would have greatly edified Hozier
"Oh," replied Morcerf, reddening slightly, "I have left the
and Jaucourt. At present I no longer think of it, and yet I
service, monsieur. Made a peer at the Restoration, I served
must tell you that we are beginning to occupy ourselves
through the first campaign under the orders of Marshal
greatly with these things under our popular government."
Bourmont. I could, therefore, expect a higher rank, and who
"Well, then, your government would do well to choose from knows what might have happened had the elder branch
the past something better than the things that I have noticed remained on the throne? But the Revolution of July was, it
on your monuments, and which have no heraldic meaning seems, sufficiently glorious to allow itself to be ungrateful,
whatever. As for you, viscount," continued Monte Cristo to and it was so for all services that did not date from the
Morcerf, "you are more fortunate than the government, for imperial period. I tendered my resignation, for when you
your arms are really beautiful, and speak to the imagination. have gained your epaulets on the battle-field, you do not
Yes, you are at once from Provence and Spain; that explains, know how to manoeuvre on the slippery grounds of the
if the portrait you showed me be like, the dark hue I so much salons. I have hung up my sword, and cast myself into
admired on the visage of the noble Catalan." It would have politics. I have devoted myself to industry; I study the useful
required the penetration of Oedipus or the Sphinx to have arts. During the twenty years I served, I often wished to do
divined the irony the count concealed beneath these words, so, but I had not the time."
apparently uttered with the greatest politeness. Morcerf
"These are the ideas that render your nation superior to any
thanked him with a smile, and pushed open the door above
other," returned Monte Cristo. "A gentleman of high birth,
which were his arms, and which, as we have said, opened
possessor of an ample fortune, you have consented to gain
into the salon. In the most conspicuous part of the salon was
your promotion as an obscure soldier, step by step -- this is
another portrait. It was that of a man, from five to eight and
uncommon; then become general, peer of France,
thirty, in the uniform of a general officer, wearing the double
commander of the Legion of Honor, you consent to again
epaulet of heavy bullion, that indicates superior rank, the
commence a second apprenticeship, without any other hope
ribbon of the Legion of Honor around his neck, which
or any other desire than that of one day becoming useful to
showed he was a commander, and on the right breast, the
your fellow-creatures; this, indeed, is praiseworthy, -- nay,
star of a grand officer of the order of the Saviour, and on the
more, it is sublime." Albert looked on and listened with
left that of the grand cross of Charles III., which proved that
astonishment; he was not used to see Monte Cristo give vent
the person represented by the picture had served in the wars
to such bursts of enthusiasm. "Alas," continued the stranger,
of Greece and Spain, or, what was just the same thing as
doubtless to dispel the slight cloud that covered Morcerf's
regarded decorations, had fulfilled some diplomatic mission
brow, "we do not act thus in Italy; we grow according to our
in the two countries.
race and our species, and we pursue the same lines, and
Monte Cristo was engaged in examining this portrait with often the same uselessness, all our lives."
no less care than he had bestowed upon the other, when
"But, monsieur," said the Count of Morcerf, "for a man of
another door opened, and he found himself opposite to the
your merit, Italy is not a country, and France opens her arms
Count of Morcerf in person. He was a man of forty to
to receive you; respond to her call. France will not, perhaps,
forty-five years, but he seemed at least fifty, and his black
be always ungrateful. She treats her children ill, but she
mustache and eyebrows contrasted strangely with his almost
always welcomes strangers."
white hair, which was cut short, in the military fashion. He
was dressed in plain clothes, and wore at his button-hole the "Ah, father," said Albert with a smile, "it is evident you do
ribbons of the different orders to which he belonged. He not know the Count of Monte Cristo; he despises all honors,
entered with a tolerably dignified step, and some little haste. and contents himself with those written on his passport."
Monte Cristo saw him advance towards him without making "That is the most just remark," replied the stranger, "I ever
a single step. It seemed as if his feet were rooted to the heard made concerning myself."
ground, and his eyes on the Count of Morcerf. "Father," said
the young man, "I have the honor of presenting to you the "You have been free to choose your career," observed the
Count of Morcerf, with a sigh; "and you have chosen the
173


CHAPTER 41


THE PRESENTATION

path strewed with flowers."

until your own be ready."

"Precisely, monsieur," replied Monte Cristo with one of those "A thousand thanks for your kindness, viscount," returned
smiles that a painter could never represent or a physiologist the Count of Monte Cristo "but I suppose that M. Bertuccio
analyze.
has suitably employed the four hours and a half I have given
him, and that I shall find a carriage of some sort ready at the
"If I did not fear to fatigue you," said the general, evidently
door." Albert was used to the count's manner of proceeding;
charmed with the count's manners, "I would have taken you
he knew that, like Nero, he was in search of the impossible,
to the Chamber; there is a debate very curious to those who
and nothing astonished him, but wishing to judge with his
are strangers to our modern senators."
own eyes how far the count's orders had been executed, he
"I shall be most grateful, monsieur, if you will, at some accompanied him to the door of the house. Monte Cristo was
future time, renew your offer, but I have been flattered with not deceived. As soon as he appeared in the Count of
the hope of being introduced to the countess, and I will Morcerf's ante-chamber, a footman, the same who at Rome
therefore wait."
had brought the count's card to the two young men, and
"Ah, here is my mother," cried the viscount. Monte Cristo, announced his visit, sprang into the vestibule, and when he
turned round hastily, and saw Madame de Morcerf at the arrived at the door the illustrious traveller found his carriage
entrance of the salon, at the door opposite to that by which awaiting him. It was a coupe of Koller's building, and with
her husband had entered, pale and motionless; when Monte horses and harness for which Drake had, to the knowledge
Cristo turned round, she let fall her arm, which for some of all the lions of Paris, refused on the previous day seven
unknown reason had been resting on the gilded door-post. hundred guineas. "Monsieur," said the count to Albert, "I do
She had been there some moments, and had heard the last not ask you to accompany me to my house, as I can only
words of the visitor. The latter rose and bowed to the show you a habitation fitted up in a hurry, and I have, as
countess, who inclined herself without speaking. "Ah, good you know, a reputation to keep up as regards not being
heavens, madame," said the count, "are you ill, or is it the taken by surprise. Give me, therefore, one more day before I
invite you; I shall then be certain not to fail in my
heat of the room that affects you?"
hospitality."
"Are you ill, mother?" cried the viscount, springing towards
"If you ask me for a day, count, I know what to anticipate; it
her.
will not be a house I shall see, but a palace. You have
She thanked them both with a smile. "No," returned she, "but decidedly some genius at your control."
I feel some emotion on seeing, for the first time, the man
without whose intervention we should have been in tears "Ma foi, spread that idea," replied the Count of Monte Cristo,
and desolation. Monsieur," continued the countess, putting his foot on the velvet-lined steps of his splendid
advancing with the majesty of a queen, "I owe to you the life carriage, "and that will be worth something to me among the
of my son, and for this I bless you. Now, I thank you for the ladies." As he spoke, he sprang into the vehicle, the door was
pleasure you give me in thus affording me the opportunity closed, but not so rapidly that Monte Cristo failed to
of thanking you as I have blessed you, from the bottom of perceive the almost imperceptible movement which stirred
my heart." The count bowed again, but lower than before; the curtains of the apartment in which he had left Madame
He was even paler than Mercedes. "Madame," said he, "the de Morcerf. When Albert returned to his mother, he found
count and yourself recompense too generously a simple her in the boudoir reclining in a large velvet arm-chair, the
action. To save a man, to spare a father's feelings, or a whole room so obscure that only the shining spangle,
mother's sensibility, is not to do a good action, but a simple fastened here and there to the drapery, and the angles of the
deed of humanity." At these words, uttered with the most gilded frames of the pictures, showed with some degree of
exquisite sweetness and politeness, Madame de Morcerf brightness in the gloom. Albert could not see the face of the
replied. "It is very fortunate for my son, monsieur, that he countess, as it was covered with a thin veil she had put on
found such a friend, and I thank God that things are thus." her head, and which fell over her features in misty folds, but
And Mercedes raised her fine eyes to heaven with so fervent it seemed to him as though her voice had altered. He could
an expression of gratitude, that the count fancied he saw distinguish amid the perfumes of the roses and heliotropes
tears in them. M. de Morcerf approached her. "Madame," in the flower-stands, the sharp and fragrant odor of volatile
said he. "I have already made my excuses to the count for salts, and he noticed in one of the chased cups on the
quitting him, and I pray you to do so also. The sitting mantle-piece the countess's smelling-bottle, taken from its
shagreen case, and exclaimed in a tone of uneasiness, as he
commences at two; it is now three, and I am to speak."
entered, -- "My dear mother, have you been ill during my
"Go, then, and monsieur and I will strive our best to forget absence?"
your absence," replied the countess, with the same tone of
deep feeling. "Monsieur," continued she, turning to Monte "No, no, Albert, but you know these roses, tuberoses, and
Cristo, "will you do us the honor of passing the rest of the orange-flowers throw out at first, before one is used to them,
such violent perfumes."
day with us?"
"Believe me, madame, I feel most grateful for your kindness,
but I got out of my travelling carriage at your door this
morning, and I am ignorant how I am installed in Paris,
which I scarcely know; this is but a trifling inquietude, I
know, but one that may be appreciated."

"Then, my dear mother," said Albert, putting his hand to the
bell, "they must be taken into the ante-chamber. You are
really ill, and just now were so pale as you came into the
room" --

"We shall have the pleasure another time," said the countess;
"you promise that?" Monte Cristo inclined himself without
answering, but the gesture might pass for assent. "I will not
detain you, monsieur," continued the countess; "I would not
have our gratitude become indiscreet or importunate."

"Yes; a pallor that suits you admirably, mother, but which
did not the less alarm my father and myself."

"My dear Count," said Albert, "I will endeavor to return your
politeness at Rome, and place my coupe at your disposal
174

"Was I pale, Albert?"

"Did your father speak of it?" inquired Mercedes eagerly.
"No, madame; but do you not remember that he spoke of the
fact to you?"
"Yes, I do remember," replied the countess. A servant

entered, summoned by Albert's ring of the bell. "Take these
flowers into the anteroom or dressing-room," said the
viscount; "they make the countess ill." The footman obeyed
his orders. A long pause ensued, which lasted until all the
flowers were removed. "What is this name of Monte Cristo?"
inquired the countess, when the servant had taken away the
last vase of flowers, "is it a family name, or the name of the
estate, or a simple title?"

"So young, -- it is impossible," said Mercedes, replying at the
same time to what Albert said as well as to her own private
reflection.

"His manners are admirable," said the countess, "at least, as
far as I could judge in the few minutes he remained here."

"I am inclined to think so."

"It is the truth, however. Three or four times he has said to
me, and certainly without the slightest premeditation, `at
such a period I was five years old, at another ten years old, at
another twelve,' and I, induced by curiosity, which kept me
alive to these details, have compared the dates, and never
"I believe, mother, it is merely a title. The count purchased found him inaccurate. The age of this singular man, who is
an island in the Tuscan archipelago, and, as he told you of no age, is then, I am certain, thirty-five. Besides, mother,
to-day, has founded a commandery. You know the same remark how vivid his eye, how raven-black his hair, and his
thing was done for Saint Stephen of Florence, Saint George, brow, though so pale, is free from wrinkles, -- he is not only
Constantinian of Parma, and even for the Order of Malta. vigorous, but also young." The countess bent her head, as if
Except this, he has no pretension to nobility, and calls beneath a heavy wave of bitter thoughts. "And has this man
himself a chance count, although the general opinion at displayed a friendship for you, Albert?" she asked with a
Rome is that the count is a man of very high distinction."
nervous shudder.

"They are perfect mother, so perfect, that they surpass by far
all I have known in the leading aristocracy of the three
proudest nobilities of Europe -- the English, the Spanish, and
the German." The countess paused a moment; then, after a
slight hesitation, she resumed, -- "You have seen, my dear
Albert -- I ask the question as a mother -- you have seen M.
de Monte Cristo in his house, you are quicksighted, have
much knowledge of the world, more tact than is usual at
your age, do you think the count is really what he appears to
be?"
"What does he appear to be?"
"Why, you have just said, -- a man of high distinction."
"I told you, my dear mother, he was esteemed such."
"But what is your own opinion, Albert?"
"I must tell you that I have not come to any decided opinion
respecting him, but I think him a Maltese."
"I do not ask you of his origin but what he is."
"Ah, what he is; that is quite another thing. I have seen so
many remarkable things in him, that if you would have me
really say what I think, I shall reply that I really do look
upon him as one of Byron's heroes, whom misery has
marked with a fatal brand; some Manfred, some Lara, some
Werner, one of those wrecks, as it were, of some ancient
family, who, disinherited of their patrimony, have achieved
one by the force of their adventurous genius, which has
placed them above the laws of society."

"And -- do -- you -- like -- him?"
"Why, he pleases me in spite of Franz d'Epinay, who tries to
convince me that he is a being returned from the other
world." The countess shuddered. "Albert," she said, in a
voice which was altered by emotion, "I have always put you
on your guard against new acquaintances. Now you are a
man, and are able to give me advice; yet I repeat to you,
Albert, be prudent."
"Why, my dear mother, it is necessary, in order to make your
advice turn to account, that I should know beforehand what
I have to distrust. The count never plays, he only drinks pure
water tinged with a little sherry, and is so rich that he cannot,
without intending to laugh at me, try to borrow money.
What, then, have I to fear from him?"
"You are right," said the countess, "and my fears are
weakness, especially when directed against a man who has
saved your life. How did your father receive him, Albert? It
is necessary that we should be more than complaisant to the
count. M. de Morcerf is sometimes occupied, his business
makes him reflective, and he might, without intending it" --

"Nothing could be in better taste than my father's demeanor,
madame," said Albert; "nay, more, he seemed greatly
flattered at two or three compliments which the count very
skilfully and agreeably paid him with as much ease as if he
had known him these thirty years. Each of these little
tickling arrows must have pleased my father," added Albert
with a laugh. "And thus they parted the best possible friends,
and M. de Morcerf even wished to take him to the Chamber
to hear the speakers." The countess made no reply. She fell
"You say" -into so deep a revery that her eyes gradually closed. The
"I say that Monte Cristo is an island in the midst of the young man, standing up before her, gazed upon her with
Mediterranean, without inhabitants or garrison, the resort of that filial affection which is so tender and endearing with
smugglers of all nations, and pirates of every flag. Who children whose mothers are still young and handsome. Then,
knows whether or not these industrious worthies do not pay after seeing her eyes closed, and hearing her breathe gently,
he believed she had dropped asleep, and left the apartment
to their feudal lord some dues for his protection?"
on tiptoe, closing the door after him with the utmost
"That is possible," said the countess, reflecting.
precaution. "This devil of a fellow," he muttered, shaking his
"Never mind," continued the young man, "smuggler or not, head; "I said at the time he would create a sensation here,
you must agree, mother dear, as you have seen him, that the and I measure his effect by an infallible thermometer. My
Count of Monte Cristo is a remarkable man, who will have mother has noticed him, and he must therefore, perforce, be
the greatest success in the salons of Paris. Why, this very remarkable." He went down to the stables, not without some
morning, in my rooms, he made his entree amongst us by slight annoyance, when he remembered that the Count of
striking every man of us with amazement, not even Monte Cristo had laid his hands on a "turnout" which sent
excepting Chateau-Renaud."
his bays down to second place in the opinion of connoisseurs.
"And what do you suppose is the count's age?" inquired "Most decidedly," said he, "men are not equal, and I must
Mercedes, evidently attaching great importance to this beg my father to develop this theorem in the Chamber of
Peers."
question.
"Thirty-five or thirty-six, mother."
175


CHAPTER 42


Chapter 42

MONSIEUR BERTUCCIO

Monsieur Bertuccio

M

eanwhile the count had arrived at his house; it had
taken him six minutes to perform the distance, but
these six minutes were sufficient to induce twenty young
men who knew the price of the equipage they had been
unable to purchase themselves, to put their horses in a
gallop in order to see the rich foreigner who could afford to
give 20,000 francs apiece for his horses. The house Ali had
chosen, and which was to serve as a town residence to
Monte Cristo, was situated on the right hand as you ascend
the Champs Elysees. A thick clump of trees and shrubs rose
in the centre, and masked a portion of the front; around this
shrubbery two alleys, like two arms, extended right and left,
and formed a carriage-drive from the iron gates to a double
portico, on every step of which stood a porcelain vase. filled
with flowers. This house, isolated from the rest, had, besides
the main entrance, another in the Rue Ponthieu. Even before
the coachman had hailed the concierge, the massy gates
rolled on their hinges -- they had seen the Count coming,
and at Paris, as everywhere else, he was served with the
rapidity of lightning. The coachman entered and traversed
the half-circle without slackening his speed, and the gates
were closed ere the wheels had ceased to sound on the
gravel. The carriage stopped at the left side of the portico,
two men presented themselves at the carriage-window; the
one was Ali, who, smiling with an expression of the most
sincere joy, seemed amply repaid by a mere look from
Monte Cristo. The other bowed respectfully, and offered his
arm to assist the count in descending. "Thanks, M.
Bertuccio," said the count, springing lightly up the three
steps of the portico; "and the notary?"
"He is in the small salon, excellency," returned Bertuccio.
"And the cards I ordered to be engraved as soon as you
knew the number of the house?"
"Your excellency, it is done already. I have been myself to the
best engraver of the Palais Royal, who did the plate in my
presence. The first card struck off was taken, according to
your orders, to the Baron Danglars, Rue de la Chaussee
d'Antin, No. 7; the others are on the mantle-piece of your
excellency's bedroom."
"Good; what o'clock is it?"
"Four o'clock." Monte Cristo gave his hat, cane, and gloves to
the same French footman who had called his carriage at the
Count of Morcerf's, and then he passed into the small salon,
preceded by Bertuccio, who showed him the way. "These are
but indifferent marbles in this ante-chamber," said Monte
Cristo. "I trust all this will soon be taken away." Bertuccio
bowed. As the steward had said, the notary awaited him in
the small salon. He was a simple-looking lawyer's clerk,
elevated to the extraordinary dignity of a provincial
scrivener. "You are the notary empowered to sell the country
house that I wish to purchase, monsieur?" asked Monte
Cristo.
"Yes, count," returned the notary.
"Is the deed of sale ready?"
"Yes, count."
"Have you brought it?"
"Here it is."
"Very well; and where is this house that I purchase?" asked

176

the count carelessly, addressing himself half to Bertuccio,
half to the notary. The steward made a gesture that signified,
"I do not know." The notary looked at the count with
astonishment. "What!" said he, "does not the count know
where the house he purchases is situated?"
"No," returned the count.
"The count does not know?"
"How should I know? I have arrived from Cadiz this
morning. I have never before been at Paris, and it is the first
time I have ever even set my foot in France."
"Ah, that is different; the house you purchase is at Auteuil."
At these words Bertuccio turned pale. "And where is
Auteuil?" asked the count.
"Close by here, monsieur," replied the notary -- "a little
beyond Passy; a charming situation, in the heart of the Bois
de Boulogne."
"So near as that?" said the Count; "but that is not in the
country. What made you choose a house at the gates of Paris,
M. Bertuccio?"
"I," cried the steward with a strange expression. "His
excellency did not charge me to purchase this house. If his
excellency will recollect -- if he will think" -"Ah, true," observed Monte Cristo; "I recollect now. I read
the advertisement in one of the papers, and was tempted by
the false title, `a country house.'"
"It is not yet too late," cried Bertuccio, eagerly; "and if your
excellency will intrust me with the commission, I will find
you a better at Enghien, at Fontenay-aux-Roses, or at
Bellevue."
"Oh, no," returned Monte Cristo negligently; "since I have
this, I will keep it."
"And you are quite right," said the notary, who feared to lose
his fee. "It is a charming place, well supplied with
spring-water and fine trees; a comfortable habitation,
although abandoned for a long time, without reckoning the
furniture, which, although old, is yet valuable, now that old
things are so much sought after. I suppose the count has the
tastes of the day?"
"To be sure," returned Monte Cristo; "it is very convenient,
then?"
"It is more -- it is magnificent."
"Peste, let us not lose such an opportunity," returned Monte
Cristo. "The deed, if you please, Mr. Notary." And he signed
it rapidly, after having first run his eye over that part of the
deed in which were specified the situation of the house and
the names of the proprietors. "Bertuccio," said he, "give
fifty-five thousand francs to monsieur." The steward left the
room with a faltering step, and returned with a bundle of
bank-notes, which the notary counted like a man who never
gives a receipt for money until after he is sure it is all there.
"And now," demanded the count, "are all the forms complied
with?"
"All, sir."
"Have you the keys?"
"They are in the hands of the concierge, who takes care of the
house, but here is the order I have given him to install the

count in his new possessions."

"You know the environs of Paris, then?"

"Very well;" and Monte Cristo made a sign with his hand to
the notary, which said, "I have no further need of you; you
may go."

"No, excellency, no," returned the steward, with a sort of
nervous trembling, which Monte Cristo, a connoisseur in all
emotions, rightly attributed to great disquietude.

"But," observed the honest notary, "the count is, I think, "It is unfortunate," returned he, "that you have never visited
mistaken; it is only fifty thousand francs, everything the environs, for I wish to see my new property this evening,
included."
and had you gone with me, you could have given me some
useful information."
"And your fee?"
"To Auteuil!" cried Bertuccio, whose copper complexion
"Is included in this sum."
became livid -- "I go to Auteuil?"
"But have you not come from Auteuil here?"
"Well, what is there surprising in that? When I live at
"Yes, certainly."
Auteuil, you must come there, as you belong to my service."
"Well, then, it is but fair that you should be paid for your Bertuccio hung down his head before the imperious look of
loss of time and trouble," said the count; and he made a his master, and remained motionless, without making any
gesture of polite dismissal. The notary left the room answer. "Why, what has happened to you? -- are you going
backwards, and bowing down to the ground; it was the first to make me ring a second time for the carriage?" asked
time he had ever met a similar client. "See this gentleman Monte Cristo, in the same tone that Louis XIV. pronounced
out," said the count to Bertuccio. And the steward followed the famous, "I have been almost obliged to wait." Bertuccio
the notary out of the room. Scarcely was the count alone, made but one bound to the ante-chamber, and cried in a
when he drew from his pocket a book closed with a lock, hoarse voice -- "His excellency's horses!" Monte Cristo wrote
and opened it with a key which he wore round his neck, and two or three notes, and, as he sealed the last, the steward
which never left him. After having sought for a few minutes, appeared. "Your excellency's carriage is at the door," said he.
he stopped at a leaf which had several notes, and compared
them with the deed of sale, which lay on the table. "`Auteuil,
Rue de la Fontaine, No. 28;' it is indeed the same," said he;
"and now, am I to rely upon an avowal extorted by religious
or physical terror? However, in an hour I shall know all.
Bertuccio!" cried he, striking a light hammer with a pliant
handle on a small gong. "Bertuccio!" The steward appeared
at the door. "Monsieur Bertuccio," said the count, "did you
never tell me that you had travelled in France?"

"Well, take your hat and gloves," returned Monte Cristo.
"Am I to accompany you, your excellency?" cried Bertuccio.
"Certainly, you must give the orders, for I intend residing at
the house." It was unexampled for a servant of the count's to
dare to dispute an order of his, so the steward, without
saying a word, followed his master, who got into the
carriage, and signed to him to follow, which he did, taking
his place respectfully on the front seat.

"In some parts of France -- yes, excellency."

177


CHAPTER 43


Chapter 43

THE HOUSE AT AUTEUIL

The House At Auteuil

M

onte Cristo noticed, as they descended the staircase,
that Bertuccio signed himself in the Corsican manner;
that is, had formed the sign of the cross in the air with his
thumb, and as he seated himself in the carriage, muttered a
short prayer. Any one but a man of exhaustless thirst for
knowledge would have had pity on seeing the steward's
extraordinary repugnance for the count's projected drive
without the walls; but the Count was too curious to let
Bertuccio off from this little journey. In twenty minutes they
were at Auteuil; the steward's emotion had continued to
augment as they entered the village. Bertuccio, crouched in
the corner of the carriage, began to examine with a feverish
anxiety every house they passed. "Tell them to stop at Rue
de la Fontaine, No. 28," said the count, fixing his eyes on the
steward, to whom he gave this order. Bertuccio's forehead
was covered with perspiration; however, he obeyed, and,
leaning out of the window, he cried to the coachman, -- "Rue
de la Fontaine, No. 28." No. 28 was situated at the extremity
of the village; during the drive night had set in, and darkness
gave the surroundings the artificial appearance of a scene on
the stage. The carriage stopped, the footman sprang off the
box, and opened the door. "Well," said the count, "you do not
get out, M. Bertuccio -- you are going to stay in the carriage,
then? What are you thinking of this evening?" Bertuccio
sprang out, and offered his shoulder to the count, who, this
time, leaned upon it as he descended the three steps of the
carriage. "Knock," said the count, "and announce me."
Bertuccio knocked, the door opened, and the concierge
appeared. "What is it?" asked he.

"Shall I accompany you, monsieur?"
"No, it is unnecessary; Bertuccio will show me a light." And
Monte Cristo accompanied these words by the gift of two
gold pieces, which produced a torrent of thanks and
blessings from the concierge. "Ah, monsieur," said he, after
having vainly searched on the mantle-piece and the shelves,
"I have not got any candles."
"Take one of the carriage-lamps, Bertuccio," said the count,
"and show me the apartments." The steward obeyed in
silence, but it was easy to see, from the manner in which the
hand that held the light trembled, how much it cost him to
obey. They went over a tolerably large ground-floor; a
second floor consisted of a salon, a bathroom, and two
bedrooms; near one of the bedrooms they came to a winding
staircase that led down to the garden.
"Ah, here is a private staircase," said the count; "that is
convenient. Light me, M. Bertuccio, and go first; we will see
where it leads to."
"Monsieur," replied Bertuccio, "it leads to the garden."
"And, pray, how do you know that?"
"It ought to do so, at least."

"Well, let us be sure of that." Bertuccio sighed, and went on
first; the stairs did, indeed, lead to the garden. At the outer
door the steward paused. "Go on, Monsieur Bertuccio," said
the count. But he who was addressed stood there, stupefied,
bewildered, stunned; his haggard eyes glanced around, as if
in search of the traces of some terrible event, and with his
"It is your new master, my good fellow," said the footman.
clinched hands he seemed striving to shut out horrible
And he held out to the concierge the notary's order.
recollections. "Well," insisted the Count. "No, no," cried
"The house is sold, then?" demanded the concierge; "and this Bertuccio, setting down the lantern at the angle of the
gentleman is coming to live here?"
interior wall. "No, monsieur, it is impossible; I can go no
"Yes, my friend," returned the count; "and I will endeavor to farther."
give you no cause to regret your old master."
"What does this mean?" demanded the irresistible voice of
"Oh, monsieur," said the concierge, "I shall not have much Monte Cristo.
cause to regret him, for he came here but seldom; it is five "Why, you must see, your excellency," cried the steward,
years since he was here last, and he did well to sell the house, "that this is not natural; that, having a house to purchase,
for it did not bring him in anything at all."
you purchase it exactly at Auteuil, and that, purchasing it at
"What was the name of your old master?" said Monte Cristo. Auteuil, this house should be No. 28, Rue de la Fontaine. Oh,
why did I not tell you all? I am sure you would not have
"The Marquis of Saint-Meran. Ah, I am sure he has not sold forced me to come. I hoped your house would have been
the house for what he gave for it."
some other one than this; as if there was not another house at
"The Marquis of Saint-Meran!" returned the count. "The Auteuil than that of the assassination!"
name is not unknown to me; the Marquis of Saint-Meran!" "What, what!" cried Monte Cristo, stopping suddenly, "what
and he appeared to meditate.
words do you utter? Devil of a man, Corsican that you are -always mysteries or superstitions. Come, take the lantern,
and let us visit the garden; you are not afraid of ghosts with
me, I hope?" Bertuccio raised the lantern, and obeyed. The
door, as it opened, disclosed a gloomy sky, in which the
moon strove vainly to struggle through a sea of clouds that
covered her with billows of vapor which she illumined for
an instant, only to sink into obscurity. The steward wished to
turn to the left. "No, no, monsieur," said Monte Cristo. "What
is the use of following the alleys? Here is a beautiful lawn;
"Yes, monsieur, one and twenty years ago; and since then we
let us go on straight forwards."
have not seen the poor marquis three times."
Bertuccio wiped the perspiration from his brow, but obeyed;
"Thanks, thanks," said Monte Cristo, judging from the
however, he continued to take the left hand. Monte Cristo,
steward's utter prostration that he could not stretch the cord
on the contrary, took the right hand; arrived near a clump of
further without danger of breaking it. "Give me a light."
trees, he stopped. The steward could not restrain himself.
"An old gentleman," continued the concierge, "a stanch
follower of the Bourbons; he had an only daughter, who
married M. de Villefort, who had been the king's attorney at
Nimes, and afterwards at Versailles." Monte Cristo glanced
at Bertuccio, who became whiter than the wall against which
he leaned to prevent himself from falling. "And is not this
daughter dead?" demanded Monte Cristo; "I fancy I have
heard so."

178

"Move, monsieur -- move away, I entreat you; you are
exactly in the spot!"

"I understand that, but I do not understand what it is that
galvanizes you in this manner."

"What spot?"

"But, monsieur, it is very natural," returned Bertuccio, "since
it was in this house that my vengeance was accomplished."

"Where he fell."
"My dear Monsieur Bertuccio," said Monte Cristo, laughing,
"control yourself; we are not at Sartena or at Corte. This is
not a Corsican arbor, but an English garden; badly kept, I
own, but still you must not calumniate it for that."
"Monsieur, I implore you do not stay there!"
"I think you are going mad, Bertuccio," said the count coldly.
"If that is the case, I warn you, I shall have you put in a
lunatic asylum."

"What! my house?"
"Oh, your excellency, it was not yours, then."
"Whose, then? The Marquis de Saint-Meran, I think, the
concierge said. What had you to revenge on the Marquis de
Saint-Meran?"
"Oh, it was not on him, monsieur; it was on another."
"This is strange," returned Monte Cristo, seeming to yield to
his reflections, "that you should find yourself without any
preparation in a house where the event happened that
causes you so much remorse."

"Alas, excellency," returned Bertuccio, joining his hands, and
shaking his head in a manner that would have excited the
count's laughter, had not thoughts of a superior interest
"Monsieur," said the steward, "it is fatality, I am sure. First,
occupied him, and rendered him attentive to the least
you purchase a house at Auteuil -- this house is the one
revelation of this timorous conscience. "Alas, excellency, the
where I have committed an assassination; you descend to the
evil has arrived!"
garden by the same staircase by which he descended; you
"M. Bertuccio," said the count, "I am very glad to tell you, stop at the spot where he received the blow; and two paces
that while you gesticulate, you wring your hands and roll farther is the grave in which he had just buried his child.
your eyes like a man possessed by a devil who will not leave This is not chance, for chance, in this case, is too much like
him; and I have always observed, that the devil most providence."
obstinate to be expelled is a secret. I knew you were a
"Well, amiable Corsican, let us suppose it is providence. I
Corsican. I knew you were gloomy, and always brooding
always suppose anything people please, and, besides, you
over some old history of the vendetta; and I overlooked that
must concede something to diseased minds. Come, collect
in Italy, because in Italy those things are thought nothing of.
yourself, and tell me all."
But in France they are considered in very bad taste; there are
gendarmes who occupy themselves with such affairs, judges "I have related it but once, and that was to the Abbe Busoni.
who condemn, and scaffolds which avenge." Bertuccio Such things," continued Bertuccio, shaking his head, "are
clasped his hands, and as, in all these evolutions, he did not only related under the seal of confession."
let fall the lantern, the light showed his pale and altered "Then," said the count, "I refer you to your confessor. Turn
countenance. Monte Cristo examined him with the same Chartreux or Trappist, and relate your secrets, but, as for me,
look that, at Rome, he had bent upon the execution of I do not like any one who is alarmed by such phantasms,
Andrea, and then, in a tone that made a shudder pass and I do not choose that my servants should be afraid to
through the veins of the poor steward, -- "The Abbe Busoni, walk in the garden of an evening. I confess I am not very
then told me an untruth," said he, "when, after his journey in desirous of a visit from the commissary of police, for, in Italy,
France, in 1829, he sent you to me, with a letter of justice is only paid when silent -- in France she is paid only
recommendation, in which he enumerated all your valuable when she speaks. Peste, I thought you somewhat Corsican, a
qualities. Well, I shall write to the abbe; I shall hold him great deal smuggler, and an excellent steward; but I see you
responsible for his protege's misconduct, and I shall soon have other strings to your bow. You are no longer in my
know all about this assassination. Only I warn you, that service, Monsieur Bertuccio."
when I reside in a country, I conform to all its code, and I
have no wish to put myself within the compass of the French "Oh, your excellency, your excellency!" cried the steward,
struck with terror at this threat, "if that is the only reason I
laws for your sake."
cannot remain in your service, I will tell all, for if I quit you,
"Oh, do not do that, excellency; I have always served you it will only be to go to the scaffold."
faithfully," cried Bertuccio, in despair. "I have always been
an honest man, and, as far as lay in my power, I have done "That is different," replied Monte Cristo; "but if you intend to
tell an untruth, reflect it were better not to speak at all."
good."
"I do not deny it," returned the count; "but why are you thus "No, monsieur, I swear to you, by my hopes of salvation, I
agitated. It is a bad sign; a quiet conscience does not occasion will tell you all, for the Abbe Busoni himself only knew a
such paleness in the cheeks, and such fever in the hands of a part of my secret; but, I pray you, go away from that
plane-tree. The moon is just bursting through the clouds,
man."
and there, standing where you do, and wrapped in that
"But, your excellency," replied Bertuccio hesitatingly, "did cloak that conceals your figure, you remind me of M. de
not the Abbe Busoni, who heard my confession in the prison Villefort."
at Nimes, tell you that I had a heavy burden upon my
" What!" cried Monte Cristo, "it was M. de Villefort?"
conscience?"
"Yes; but as he said you would make an excellent steward, I "Your excellency knows him?"
concluded you had stolen -- that was all."

"The former royal attorney at Nimes?"

"Oh, your excellency," returned Bertuccio in deep contempt.

"Yes."

"Or, as you are a Corsican, that you had been unable to resist "Who married the Marquis of Saint-Meran's daughter?"
the desire of making a `stiff,' as you call it."
"Yes."
"Yes, my good master," cried Bertuccio, casting himself at the
"Who enjoyed the reputation of being the most severe, the
count's feet, "it was simply vengeance -- nothing else."
most upright, the most rigid magistrate on the bench?"
179


CHAPTER 43


THE HOUSE AT AUTEUIL

"Well, monsieur," said Bertuccio, "this man with this spotless
reputation" -"Well?"
"Was a villain."
"Bah," replied Monte Cristo, "impossible!"
"It is as I tell you."
"Ah, really," said Monte Cristo. "Have you proof of this?"

180

"I had it."
"And you have lost it; how stupid!"
"Yes; but by careful search it might be recovered."
"Really," returned the count, "relate it to me, for it begins to
interest me." And the count, humming an air from "Lucia,"
went to sit down on a bench, while Bertuccio followed him,
collecting his thoughts. Bertuccio remained standing before
him.


Chapter 44

"A

t what point shall I begin my story, your excellency?"
asked Bertuccio.

The Vendetta
Bonapartism. You have doubtless heard of these massacres,
your excellency?"

"Where you please," returned Monte Cristo, "since I know "Vaguely; I was far from France at that period. Go on."
nothing at all of it."
"As I entered Nimes, I literally waded in blood; at every step
"I thought the Abbe Busoni had told your excellency."
you encountered dead bodies and bands of murderers, who
killed, plundered, and burned. At the sight of this slaughter
"Some particulars, doubtless, but that is seven or eight years
and devastation I became terrified, not for myself -- for I, a
ago, and I have forgotten them."
simple Corsican fisherman, had nothing to fear; on the
"Then I can speak without fear of tiring your excellency."
contrary, that time was most favorable for us smugglers -"Go on, M. Bertuccio; you will supply the want of the but for my brother, a soldier of the empire, returning from
the army of the Loire, with his uniform and his epaulets,
evening papers."
there was everything to apprehend. I hastened to the
"The story begins in 1815."
inn-keeper. My misgivings had been but too true. My
brother had arrived the previous evening at Nimes, and, at
"Ah," said Monte Cristo, "1815 is not yesterday."
the very door of the house where he was about to demand
"No, monsieur, and yet I recollect all things as clearly as if
hospitality, he had been assassinated. I did all in my power
they had happened but then. I had a brother, an elder
to discover the murderers, but no one durst tell me their
brother, who was in the service of the emperor; he had
names, so much were they dreaded. I then thought of that
become lieutenant in a regiment composed entirely of
French justice of which I had heard so much, and which
Corsicans. This brother was my only friend; we became
feared nothing, and I went to the king's attorney."
orphans -- I at five, he at eighteen. He brought me up as if I
had been his son, and in 1814 he married. When the emperor "And this king's attorney was named Villefort?" asked Monte
returned from the Island of Elba, my brother instantly joined Cristo carelessly.
the army, was slightly wounded at Waterloo, and retired "Yes, your excellency; he came from Marseilles, where he
with the army beyond the Loire."
had been deputy-procureur. His zeal had procured him
"But that is the history of the Hundred Days, M. Bertuccio," advancement, and he was said to be one of the first who had
said the count; "unless I am mistaken, it has been already informed the government of the departure from the Island of
Elba."
written."
"Excuse me, excellency, but these details are necessary, and
you promised to be patient."

"Then," said Monte Cristo "you went to him?"

"`Monsieur,' I said, `my brother was assassinated yesterday
in the streets of Nimes, I know not by whom, but it is your
duty to find out. You are the representative of justice here,
"One day we received a letter. I should tell you that we lived
and it is for justice to avenge those she has been unable to
in the little village of Rogliano, at the extremity of Cape
protect.' -- `Who was your brother?' asked he. -- `A
Corso. This letter was from my brother. He told us that the
lieutenant in the Corsican battalion.' -- `A soldier of the
army was disbanded, and that he should return by
usurper, then?' -- `A soldier of the French army.' -- `Well,'
Chateauroux, Clermont-Ferrand, Le Puy, and Nimes; and, if
replied he, `he has smitten with the sword, and he has
I had any money, he prayed me to leave it for him at Nimes,
perished by the sword.' -- `You are mistaken, monsieur,' I
with an inn-keeper with whom I had dealings."
replied; `he has perished by the poniard.' -- `What do you
"In the smuggling line?" said Monte Cristo.
want me to do?' asked the magistrate. -- `I have already told
you -- avenge him.' -- `On whom?' -- `On his murderers.' -"Eh, your excellency? Every one must live."
`How should I know who they are?' -- `Order them to be
"Certainly; go on."
sought for.' -- `Why, your brother has been involved in a
"I loved my brother tenderly, as I told your excellency, and I quarrel, and killed in a duel. All these old soldiers commit
resolved not to send the money, but to take it to him myself. excesses which were tolerated in the time of the emperor,
I possessed a thousand francs. I left five hundred with but which are not suffered now, for the people here do not
Assunta, my sister-in-law, and with the other five hundred I like soldiers of such disorderly conduct.' -- `Monsieur,' I
set off for Nimes. It was easy to do so, and as I had my boat replied, `it is not for myself that I entreat your interference -and a lading to take in at sea, everything favored my project. I should grieve for him or avenge him, but my poor brother
But, after we had taken in our cargo, the wind became had a wife, and were anything to happen to me, the poor
contrary, so that we were four or five days without being creature would perish from want, for my brother's pay alone
able to enter the Rhone. At last, however, we succeeded, and kept her. Pray, try and obtain a small government pension
worked up to Arles. I left the boat between Bellegarde and for her.'
Beaucaire, and took the road to Nimes."
"`Every revolution has its catastrophes,' returned M. de
"Go on; I will keep my word."

"We are getting to the story now?"
"Yes, your excellency; excuse me, but, as you will see, I only
tell you what is absolutely necessary. Just at this time the
famous massacres took place in the south of France. Three
brigands, called Trestaillon, Truphemy, and Graffan,
publicly assassinated everybody whom they suspected of

Villefort; `your brother has been the victim of this. It is a
misfortune, and government owes nothing to his family. If
we are to judge by all the vengeance that the followers of the
usurper exercised on the partisans of the king, when, in their
turn, they were in power, your brother would be to-day, in
all probability, condemned to death. What has happened is
quite natural, and in conformity with the law of reprisals.' -181


CHAPTER 44


THE VENDETTA

`What,' cried I, `do you, a magistrate, speak thus to me?' -`All these Corsicans are mad, on my honor,' replied M. de
Villefort; `they fancy that their countryman is still emperor.
You have mistaken the time, you should have told me this
two months ago, it is too late now. Go now, at once, or I shall
have you put out.'

forced to traverse the whole of the garden alone."

"I looked at him an instant to see if there was anything to
hope from further entreaty. But he was a man of stone. I
approached him, and said in a low voice, `Well, since you
know the Corsicans so well, you know that they always keep
their word. You think that it was a good deed to kill my
brother, who was a Bonapartist, because you are a royalist.
Well, I, who am a Bonapartist also, declare one thing to you,
which is, that I will kill you. From this moment I declare the
vendetta against you, so protect yourself as well as you can,
for the next time we meet your last hour has come.' And
before he had recovered from his surprise, I opened the door
and left the room."

"Go on."

"Well, well," said Monte Cristo, "such an innocent looking
person as you are to do those things, M. Bertuccio, and to a
king's attorney at that! But did he know what was meant by
the terrible word `vendetta'?"
"He knew so well, that from that moment he shut himself in
his house, and never went out unattended, seeking me high
and low. Fortunately, I was so well concealed that he could
not find me. Then he became alarmed, and dared not stay
any longer at Nimes, so he solicited a change of residence,
and, as he was in reality very influential, he was nominated
to Versailles. But, as you know, a Corsican who has sworn to
avenge himself cares not for distance, so his carriage, fast as
it went, was never above half a day's journey before me, who
followed him on foot. The most important thing was, not to
kill him only -- for I had an opportunity of doing so a
hundred times -- but to kill him without being discovered -at least, without being arrested. I no longer belonged to
myself, for I had my sister-in-law to protect and provide for.
For three months I watched M. de Villefort, for three months
he took not a step out-of-doors without my following him.
At length I discovered that he went mysteriously to Auteuil.
I followed him thither, and I saw him enter the house where
we now are, only, instead of entering by the great door that
looks into the street, he came on horseback, or in his carriage,
left the one or the other at the little inn, and entered by the
gate you see there." Monte Cristo made a sign with his head
to show that he could discern in the darkness the door to
which Bertuccio alluded. "As I had nothing more to do at
Versailles, I went to Auteuil, and gained all the information I
could. If I wished to surprise him, it was evident this was the
spot to lie in wait for him. The house belonged, as the
concierge informed your excellency, to M. de Saint-Meran,
Villefort's father-in-law. M. de Saint-Meran lived at
Marseilles, so that this country house was useless to him,
and it was reported to be let to a young widow, known only
by the name of `the baroness.'

"And," asked the count, "did you ever know the name of this
woman?"
"No, excellency," returned Bertuccio; "you will see that I had
no time to learn it."
"That evening," continued Bertuccio, "I could have killed the
procureur, but as I was not sufficiently acquainted with the
neighborhood, I was fearful of not killing him on the spot,
and that if his cries were overheard I might be taken; so I put
it off until the next occasion, and in order that nothing
should escape me, I took a chamber looking into the street
bordered by the wall of the garden. Three days after, about
seven o'clock in the evening, I saw a servant on horseback
leave the house at full gallop, and take the road to Sevres. I
concluded that he was going to Versailles, and I was not
deceived. Three hours later, the man returned covered with
dust, his errand was performed, and two minutes after,
another man on foot, muffled in a mantle, opened the little
door of the garden, which he closed after him. I descended
rapidly; although I had not seen Villefort's face, I recognized
him by the beating of my heart. I crossed the street, and
stopped at a post placed at the angle of the wall, and by
means of which I had once before looked into the garden.
This time I did not content myself with looking, but I took
my knife out of my pocket, felt that the point was sharp, and
sprang over the wall. My first care was to run to the door; he
had left the key in it, taking the simple precaution of turning
it twice in the lock. Nothing, then, preventing my escape by
this means, I examined the grounds. The garden was long
and narrow; a stretch of smooth turf extended down the
middle, and at the corners were clumps of trees with thick
and massy foliage, that made a background for the shrubs
and flowers. In order to go from the door to the house, or
from the house to the door, M. de Villefort would be obliged
to pass by one of these clumps of trees.

"It was the end of September; the wind blew violently. The
faint glimpses of the pale moon, hidden momentarily by
masses of dark clouds that were sweeping across the sky,
whitened the gravel walks that led to the house, but were
unable to pierce the obscurity of the thick shrubberies, in
which a man could conceal himself without any fear of
discovery. I hid myself in the one nearest to the path
Villefort must take, and scarcely was I there when, amidst
the gusts of wind, I fancied I heard groans; but you know, or
rather you do not know, your excellency, that he who is
about to commit an assassination fancies that he hears low
cries perpetually ringing in his ears. Two hours passed thus,
during which I imagined I heard moans repeatedly.
Midnight struck. As the last stroke died away, I saw a faint
light shine through the windows of the private staircase by
which we have just descended. The door opened, and the
man in the mantle reappeared. The terrible moment had
come, but I had so long been prepared for it that my heart
"One evening, as I was looking over the wall, I saw a young
did not fail in the least. I drew my knife from my pocket
and handsome woman who was walking alone in that
again, opened it, and made ready to strike. The man in the
garden, which was not overlooked by any windows, and I
mantle advanced towards me, but as he drew near I saw that
guessed that she was awaiting M. de Villefort. When she was
he had a weapon in his hand. I was afraid, not of a struggle,
sufficiently near for me to distinguish her features, I saw she
but of a failure. When he was only a few paces from me, I
was from eighteen to nineteen, tall and very fair. As she had
saw that what I had taken for a weapon was only a spade. I
a loose muslin dress on and as nothing concealed her figure,
was still unable to divine for what reason M. de Villefort had
I saw she would ere long become a mother. A few moments
this spade in his hands, when he stopped close to the thicket
after, the little door was opened and a man entered. The
where I was, glanced round, and began to dig a hole in the
young woman hastened to meet him. They threw themselves
earth. I then perceived that he was hiding something under
into each other's arms, embraced tenderly, and returned
his mantle, which he laid on the grass in order to dig more
together to the house. The man was M. de Villefort; I fully
freely. Then, I confess, curiosity mingled with hatred; I
believed that when he went out in the night he would be
wished to see what Villefort was going to do there, and I
182

remained motionless, holding my breath. Then an idea
crossed my mind, which was confirmed when I saw the
procureur lift from under his mantle a box, two feet long,
and six or eight inches deep. I let him place the box in the
hole he had made, then, while he stamped with his feet to
remove all traces of his occupation, I rushed on him and
plunged my knife into his breast, exclaiming, -- `I am
Giovanni Bertuccio; thy death for my brother's; thy treasure
for his widow; thou seest that my vengeance is more
complete than I had hoped.' I know not if he heard these
words; I think he did not, for he fell without a cry. I felt his
blood gush over my face, but I was intoxicated, I was
delirious, and the blood refreshed, instead of burning me. In
a second I had disinterred the box; then, that it might not be
known I had done so, I filled up the hole, threw the spade
over the wall, and rushed through the door, which I
double-locked, carrying off the key."
"Ah," said Monte Cristo "it seems to me this was nothing but
murder and robbery."
"No, your excellency," returned Bertuccio; "it was a vendetta
followed by restitution."
"And was the sum a large one?"
"It was not money."
"Ah, I recollect," replied the count; "did you not say
something of an infant?"
"Yes, excellency; I hastened to the river, sat down on the
bank, and with my knife forced open the lock of the box. In a
fine linen cloth was wrapped a new-born child. Its purple
visage, and its violet-colored hands showed that it had
perished from suffocation, but as it was not yet cold, I
hesitated to throw it into the water that ran at my feet. After
a moment I fancied that I felt a slight pulsation of the heart,
and as I had been assistant at the hospital at Bastia, I did
what a doctor would have done -- I inflated the lungs by
blowing air into them, and at the expiration of a quarter of
an hour, it began to breathe, and cried feebly. In my turn I
uttered a cry, but a cry of joy. `God has not cursed me then,' I
cried, `since he permits me to save the life of a human
creature, in exchange for the life I have taken away.'"
"And what did you do with the child?" asked Monte Cristo.
"It was an embarrassing load for a man seeking to escape."
"I had not for a moment the idea of keeping it, but I knew
that at Paris there was an asylum where they receive such
creatures. As I passed the city gates I declared that I had
found the child on the road, and I inquired where the
asylum was; the box confirmed my statement, the linen
proved that the infant belonged to wealthy parents, the
blood with which I was covered might have proceeded from
the child as well as from any one else. No objection was
raised, but they pointed out the asylum, which was situated
at the upper end of the Rue d'Enfer, and after having taken
the precaution of cutting the linen in two pieces, so that one
of the two letters which marked it was on the piece wrapped
around the child, while the other remained in my possession,
I rang the bell, and fled with all speed. A fortnight after I
was at Rogliano, and I said to Assunta, -- `Console thyself,
sister; Israel is dead, but he is avenged.' She demanded what
I meant, and when I had told her all, -- `Giovanni,' said she,
`you should have brought this child with you; we would
have replaced the parents it has lost, have called it Benedetto,
and then, in consequence of this good action, God would
have blessed us.' In reply I gave her the half of the linen I
had kept in order to reclaim him if we became rich."
"What letters were marked on the linen?" said Monte Cristo.
"An H and an N, surmounted by a baron's coronet."

"By heaven, M. Bertuccio, you make use of heraldic terms;
where did you study heraldry?"
"In your service, excellency, where everything is learned."
"Go on, I am curious to know two things."
"What are they, your excellency?"
"What became of this little boy? for I think you told me it
was a boy, M. Bertuccio."
"No excellency, I do not recollect telling you that."
"I thought you did; I must have been mistaken."
"No, you were not, for it was in reality a little boy. But your
excellency wished to know two things; what was the
second?"
"The second was the crime of which you were accused when
you asked for a confessor, and the Abbe Busoni came to visit
you at your request in the prison at Nimes."
"The story will be very long, excellency."
"What matter? you know I take but little sleep, and I do not
suppose you are very much inclined for it either." Bertuccio
bowed, and resumed his story.
"Partly to drown the recollections of the past that haunted
me, partly to supply the wants of the poor widow, I eagerly
returned to my trade of smuggler, which had become more
easy since that relaxation of the laws which always follows a
revolution. The southern districts were ill-watched in
particular, in consequence of the disturbances that were
perpetually breaking out in Avignon, Nimes, or Uzes. We
profited by this respite on the part of the government to
make friends everywhere. Since my brother's assassination
in the streets of Nimes, I had never entered the town; the
result was that the inn-keeper with whom we were
connected, seeing that we would no longer come to him, was
forced to come to us, and had established a branch to his inn,
on the road from Bellegarde to Beaucaire, at the sign of the
Pont du Gard. We had thus, at Aigues-Mortes, Martigues, or
Bouc, a dozen places where we left our goods, and where, in
case of necessity, we concealed ourselves from the
gendarmes and custom-house officers. Smuggling is a
profitable trade, when a certain degree of vigor and
intelligence is employed; as for myself, brought up in the
mountains, I had a double motive for fearing the gendarmes
and custom-house officers, as my appearance before the
judges would cause an inquiry, and an inquiry always looks
back into the past. And in my past life they might find
something far more grave than the selling of smuggled
cigars, or barrels of brandy without a permit. So, preferring
death to capture, I accomplished the most astonishing deeds,
and which, more than once, showed me that the too great
care we take of our bodies is the only obstacle to the success
of those projects which require rapid decision, and vigorous
and determined execution. In reality, when you have once
devoted your life to your enterprises, you are no longer the
equal of other men, or, rather, other men are no longer your
equals, and whosoever has taken this resolution, feels his
strength and resources doubled."
"Philosophy, M. Bertuccio," interrupted the Count; "you have
done a little of everything in your life."
"Oh, excellency,"
"No, no; but philosophy at half-past ten at night is somewhat
late; yet I have no other observation to make, for what you
say is correct, which is more than can be said for all
philosophy."
"My journeys became more and more extensive and more
productive. Assunta took care of all, and our little fortune
183


CHAPTER 44


THE VENDETTA

increased. One day as I was setting off on an expedition,
`Go,' said she; `at your return I will give you a surprise.' I
questioned her, but in vain; she would tell me nothing, and I
departed. Our expedition lasted nearly six weeks; we had
been to Lucca to take in oil, to Leghorn for English cottons,
and we ran our cargo without opposition, and returned
home full of joy. When I entered the house, the first thing I
beheld in the middle of Assunta's chamber was a cradle that
might be called sumptuous compared with the rest of the
furniture, and in it a baby seven or eight months old. I
uttered a cry of joy; the only moments of sadness I had
known since the assassination of the procureur were caused
by the recollection that I had abandoned this child. For the
assassination itself I had never felt any remorse. Poor
Assunta had guessed all. She had profited by my absence,
and furnished with the half of the linen, and having written
down the day and hour at which I had deposited the child at
the asylum, had set off for Paris, and had reclaimed it. No
objection was raised, and the infant was given up to her. Ah,
I confess, your excellency, when I saw this poor creature
sleeping peacefully in its cradle, I felt my eyes filled with
tears. `Ah, Assunta,' cried I, `you are an excellent woman,
and heaven will bless you.'"
"This," said Monte Cristo, "is less correct than your
philosophy, -- it is only faith."
"Alas, your excellency is right," replied Bertuccio, "and God
made this infant the instrument of our punishment. Never
did a perverse nature declare itself more prematurely, and
yet it was not owing to any fault in his bringing up. He was
a most lovely child, with large blue eyes, of that deep color
that harmonizes so well with the blond complexion; only his
hair, which was too light, gave his face a most singular
expression, and added to the vivacity of his look, and the
malice of his smile. Unfortunately, there is a proverb which
says that `red is either altogether good or altogether bad.'
The proverb was but too correct as regarded Benedetto, and
even in his infancy he manifested the worst disposition. It is
true that the indulgence of his foster-mother encouraged him.
This child, for whom my poor sister would go to the town,
five or six leagues off, to purchase the earliest fruits and the
most tempting sweetmeats, preferred to Palma grapes or
Genoese preserves, the chestnuts stolen from a neighbor's
orchard, or the dried apples in his loft, when he could eat as
well of the nuts and apples that grew in my garden. One day,
when Benedetto was about five or six, our neighbor Vasilio,
who, according to the custom of the country, never locked
up his purse or his valuables -- for, as your excellency knows,
there are no thieves in Corsica -- complained that he had lost
a louis out of his purse; we thought he must have made a
mistake in counting his money, but he persisted in the
accuracy of his statement. One day, Benedetto, who had
been gone from the house since morning, to our great
anxiety, did not return until late in the evening, dragging a
monkey after him, which he said he had found chained to
the foot of a tree. For more than a month past, the
mischievous child, who knew not what to wish for, had
taken it into his head to have a monkey. A boatman, who
had passed by Rogliano, and who had several of these
animals, whose tricks had greatly diverted him, had,
doubtless, suggested this idea to him. `Monkeys are not
found in our woods chained to trees,' said I; `confess how
you obtained this animal.' Benedetto maintained the truth of
what he had said, and accompanied it with details that did
more honor to his imagination than to his veracity. I became
angry; he began to laugh, I threatened to strike him, and he
made two steps backwards. `You cannot beat me,' said he;
`you have no right, for you are not my father.'
"We never knew who had revealed this fatal secret, which
184

we had so carefully concealed from him; however, it was this
answer, in which the child's whole character revealed itself,
that almost terrified me, and my arm fell without touching
him. The boy triumphed, and this victory rendered him so
audacious, that all the money of Assunta, whose affection for
him seemed to increase as he became more unworthy of it,
was spent in caprices she knew not how to contend against,
and follies she had not the courage to prevent. When I was at
Rogliano everything went on properly, but no sooner was
my back turned than Benedetto became master, and
everything went ill. When he was only eleven, he chose his
companions from among the young men of eighteen or
twenty, the worst characters in Bastia, or, indeed, in Corsica,
and they had already, for some mischievous pranks, been
several times threatened with a prosecution. I became
alarmed, as any prosecution might be attended with serious
consequences. I was compelled, at this period, to leave
Corsica on an important expedition; I reflected for a long
time, and with the hope of averting some impending
misfortune, I resolved that Benedetto should accompany me.
I hoped that the active and laborious life of a smuggler, with
the severe discipline on board, would have a salutary effect
on his character, which was now well-nigh, if not quite,
corrupt. I spoke to Benedetto alone, and proposed to him to
accompany me, endeavoring to tempt him by all the
promises most likely to dazzle the imagination of a child of
twelve. He heard me patiently, and when I had finished,
burst out laughing.
"`Are you mad, uncle?' (he called me by this name when he
was in good humor); `do you think I am going to change the
life I lead for your mode of existence -- my agreeable
indolence for the hard and precarious toil you impose on
yourself, exposed to the bitter frost at night, and the
scorching heat by day, compelled to conceal yourself, and
when you are perceived, receive a volley of bullets, all to
earn a paltry sum? Why, I have as much money as I want;
mother Assunta always furnishes me when I ask for it! You
see that I should be a fool to accept your offer.' The
arguments, and his audacity, perfectly stupefied me.
Benedetto rejoined his associates, and I saw him from a
distance point me out to them as a fool."
"Sweet child," murmured Monte Cristo.
"Oh, had he been my own son," replied Bertuccio, "or even
my nephew, I would have brought him back to the right
road, for the knowledge that you are doing your duty gives
you strength, but the idea that I was striking a child whose
father I had killed, made it impossible for me to punish him.
I gave my sister, who constantly defended the unfortunate
boy, good advice, and as she confessed that she had several
times missed money to a considerable amount, I showed her
a safe place in which to conceal our little treasure for the
future. My mind was already made up. Benedetto could read,
write, and cipher perfectly, for when the fit seized him, he
learned more in a day than others in a week. My intention
was to enter him as a clerk in some ship, and without letting
him know anything of my plan, to convey him some
morning on board; by this means his future treatment would
depend upon his own conduct. I set off for France, after
having fixed upon the plan. Our cargo was to be landed in
the Gulf of Lyons, and this was a difficult thing to do
because it was then the year 1829. The most perfect
tranquillity was restored, and the vigilance of the
custom-house officers was redoubled, and their strictness
was increased at this time, in consequence of the fair at
Beaucaire.
"Our expedition made a favorable beginning. We anchored
our vessel -- which had a double hold, where our goods
were concealed -- amidst a number of other vessels that

bordered the banks of the Rhone from Beaucaire to Arles. On
our arrival we began to discharge our cargo in the night, and
to convey it into the town, by the help of the inn-keeper with
whom we were connected. Whether success rendered us
imprudent, or whether we were betrayed, I know not; but
one evening, about five o'clock, our little cabin-boy came
breathlessly, to inform us that he had seen a detachment of
custom-house officers advancing in our direction. It was not
their proximity that alarmed us, for detachments were
constantly patrolling along the banks of the Rhone, but the
care, according to the boy's account, that they took to avoid
being seen. In an instant we were on the alert, but it was too
late; our vessel was surrounded, and amongst the
custom-house officers I observed several gendarmes, and, as
terrified at the sight of their uniforms as I was brave at the
sight of any other, I sprang into the hold, opened a port, and
dropped into the river, dived, and only rose at intervals to
breathe, until I reached a ditch that had recently been made
from the Rhone to the canal that runs from Beaucaire to
Aigues-Mortes. I was now safe, for I could swim along the
ditch without being seen, and I reached the canal in safety. I
had designedly taken this direction. I have already told your
excellency of an inn-keeper from Nimes who had set up a
little tavern on the road from Bellegarde to Beaucaire."
"Yes," said Monte Cristo "I perfectly recollect him; I think he
was your colleague."

I stepped into the shed, and it was fortunate I did so, for at
that moment Caderousse entered with a stranger.
"I waited patiently, not to overhear what they said, but
because I could do nothing else; besides, the same thing had
occurred often before. The man who was with Caderousse
was evidently a stranger to the South of France; he was one
of those merchants who come to sell jewellery at the
Beaucaire fair, and who during the month the fair lasts, and
during which there is so great an influx of merchants and
customers from all parts of Europe, often have dealings to
the amount of 100,000 to 150,000 francs. Caderousse entered
hastily. Then, seeing that the room was, as usual, empty, and
only guarded by the dog, he called to his wife, `Hello,
Carconte,' said he, `the worthy priest has not deceived us;
the diamond is real.' An exclamation of joy was heard, and
the staircase creaked beneath a feeble step. `What do you
say?' asked his wife, pale as death.
"`I say that the diamond is real, and that this gentleman, one
of the first jewellers of Paris, will give us 50,000 francs for it.
Only, in order to satisfy himself that it really belongs to us,
he wishes you to relate to him, as I have done already, the
miraculous manner in which the diamond came into our
possession. In the meantime please to sit down, monsieur,
and I will fetch you some refreshment.' The jeweller
examined attentively the interior of the inn and the apparent
poverty of the persons who were about to sell him a
diamond that seemed to have come from the casket of a
prince. `Relate your story, madame,' said he, wishing, no
doubt, to profit by the absence of the husband, so that the
latter could not influence the wife's story, to see if the two
recitals tallied.

"Precisely," answered Bertuccio; "but he had, seven or eight
years before this period, sold his establishment to a tailor at
Marseilles, who, having almost ruined himself in his old
trade, wished to make his fortune in another. Of course, we
made the same arrangements with the new landlord that we
had with the old; and it was of this man that I intended to
"`Oh,' returned she, `it was a gift of heaven. My husband was
ask shelter."
a great friend, in 1814 or 1815, of a sailor named Edmond
"What was his name?" inquired the count, who seemed to Dantes. This poor fellow, whom Caderousse had forgotten,
become somewhat interested in Bertuccio's story.
had not forgotten him, and at his death he bequeathed this
diamond to him.' -- `But how did he obtain it?' asked the
"Gaspard Caderousse; he had married a woman from the
jeweller; `had he it before he was imprisoned?' -- `No,
village of Carconte, and whom we did not know by any
monsieur; but it appears that in prison he made the
other name than that of her village. She was suffering from
acquaintance of a rich Englishman, and as in prison he fell
malarial fever, and seemed dying by inches. As for her
sick, and Dantes took the same care of him as if he had been
husband, he was a strapping fellow of forty, or five and forty,
his brother, the Englishman, when he was set free, gave this
who had more than once, in time of danger, given ample
stone to Dantes, who, less fortunate, died, and, in his turn,
proof of his presence of mind and courage."
left it to us, and charged the excellent abbe, who was here
"And you say," interrupted Monte Cristo "that this took this morning, to deliver it.' -- `The same story,' muttered the
place towards the year" -jeweller; `and improbable as it seemed at first, it may be true.
There's only the price we are not agreed about.' -- `How not
"1829, your excellency."
agreed about?' said Caderousse. `I thought we agreed for the
"In what month?"
price I asked.' -- `That is,' replied the jeweller, `I offered
40,000 francs.' -- `Forty thousand,' cried La Carconte; `we
"June."
will not part with it for that sum. The abbe told us it was
"The beginning or the end?"
worth 50,000 without the setting.'
"The evening of the 3d."
"`What was the abbe's name?' asked the indefatigable
"Ah," said Monte Cristo "the evening of the 3d of June, 1829. questioner. -- `The Abbe Busoni,' said La Carconte. -- `He
Go on."
was a foreigner?' -- `An Italian, from the neighborhood of
"It was from Caderousse that I intended demanding shelter, Mantua, I believe.' -- `Let me see this diamond again,' replied
and, as we never entered by the door that opened onto the the jeweller; `the first time you are often mistaken as to the
road, I resolved not to break through the rule, so climbing value of a stone.' Caderousse took from his pocket a small
over the garden-hedge, I crept amongst the olive and wild case of black shagreen, opened, and gave it to the jeweller.
fig trees, and fearing that Caderousse might have some guest, At the sight of the diamond, which was as large as a
I entered a kind of shed in which I had often passed the hazel-nut, La Carconte's eyes sparkled with cupidity."
night, and which was only separated from the inn by a
partition, in which holes had been made in order to enable
us to watch an opportunity of announcing our presence. My
intention was, if Caderousse was alone, to acquaint him with
my presence, finish the meal the custom-house officers had
interrupted, and profit by the threatened storm to return to
the Rhone, and ascertain the state of our vessel and its crew.

"And what did you think of this fine story, eavesdropper?"
said Monte Cristo; "did you credit it?"
"Yes, your excellency. I did not look on Caderousse as a bad
man, and I thought him incapable of committing a crime, or
even a theft."
"That did more honor to your heart than to your experience,
185


CHAPTER 44

M. Bertuccio. Had you known this Edmond Dantes, of
whom they spoke?"

THE VENDETTA
gold, and 30,000 francs in bank-notes.

"`Wait while I light the lamp,' said La Carconte; `it is
"No, your excellency, I had never heard of him before, and growing dark, and there may be some mistake.' In fact, night
never but once afterwards, and that was from the Abbe had come on during this conversation, and with night the
Busoni himself, when I saw him in the prison at Nimes."
storm which had been threatening for the last half-hour. The
thunder growled in the distance; but it was apparently not
"Go on."
heard by the jeweller, Caderousse, or La Carconte, absorbed
"The jeweller took the ring, and drawing from his pocket a as they were all three with the demon of gain. I myself felt; a
pair of steel pliers and a small set of copper scales, he took strange kind of fascination at the sight of all this gold and all
the stone out of its setting, and weighed it carefully. `I will these bank-notes; it seemed to me that I was in a dream, and,
give you 45,000,' said he, `but not a sou more; besides, as that as it always happens in a dream, I felt myself riveted to the
is the exact value of the stone, I brought just that sum with spot. Caderousse counted and again counted the gold and
me.' -- `Oh, that's no matter,' replied Caderousse, `I will go the notes, then handed them to his wife, who counted and
back with you to fetch the other 5,000 francs.' -- `No,' counted them again in her turn. During this time, the
returned the jeweller, giving back the diamond and the ring jeweller made the diamond play and sparkle in the
to Caderousse -- `no, it is worth no more, and I am sorry I lamplight, and the gem threw out jets of light which made
offered so much, for the stone has a flaw in it, which I had him unmindful of those which -- precursors of the storm -not seen. However, I will not go back on my word, and I will began to play in at the windows. `Well,' inquired the jeweller,
give 45,000.' -- `At least, replace the diamond in the ring,' `is the cash all right?'
said La Carconte sharply. -- `Ah, true,' replied the jeweller,
"`Yes,' said Caderousse. `Give me the pocket-book, La
and he reset the stone. -- `No matter,' observed Caderousse,
Carconte, and find a bag somewhere.'
replacing the box in his pocket, `some one else will purchase
it.' -- `Yes,' continued the jeweller; `but some one else will not "La Carconte went to a cupboard, and returned with an old
be so easy as I am, or content himself with the same story. It leathern pocket-book and a bag. From the former she took
is not natural that a man like you should possess such a some greasy letters, and put in their place the bank-notes,
diamond. He will inform against you. You will have to find and from the bag took two or three crowns of six livres each,
the Abbe Busoni; and abbes who give diamonds worth two which, in all probability, formed the entire fortune of the
thousand louis are rare. The law would seize it, and put you miserable couple. `There,' said Caderousse; `and now,
in prison; if at the end of three or four months you are set at although you have wronged us of perhaps 10,000 francs, will
liberty, the ring will be lost, or a false stone, worth three you have your supper with us? I invite you with good-will.'
francs, will be given you, instead of a diamond worth 50,000 -- `Thank you,' replied the jeweller, `it must be getting late,
or perhaps 55,000 francs; from which you must allow that and I must return to Beaucaire -- my wife will be getting
one runs considerable risk in purchasing.' Caderousse and uneasy.' He drew out his watch, and exclaimed, `Morbleu,
his wife looked eagerly at each other. -- `No,' said nearly nine o'clock -- why, I shall not get back to Beaucaire
Caderousse, `we are not rich enough to lose 5,000 francs.' -- before midnight! Good-night, my friends. If the Abbe Busoni
`As you please, my dear sir,' said the, jeweller; `I had, should by any accident return, think of me.' -- `In another
however, as you see, brought you the money in bright coin.' week you will have left Beaucaire.' remarked Caderousse,
And he drew from his pocket a handful of gold, and held it `for the fair ends in a few days.' -- `True, but that makes no
sparkling before the dazzled eyes of the innkeeper, and in difference. Write to me at Paris, to M. Joannes, in the Palais
the other hand he held a packet of bank-notes.
Royal, arcade Pierre, No. 45. I will make the journey on
purpose to see him, if it is worth while.' At this moment
"There was evidently a severe struggle in the mind of
there was a tremendous clap of thunder, accompanied by a
Caderousse; it was plain that the small shagreen case, which
flash of lightning so vivid, that it quite eclipsed the light of
he turned over and over in his hand, did not seem to him
the lamp.
commensurate in value to the enormous sum which
fascinated his gaze. He turned towards his wife. `What do "`See here,' exclaimed Caderousse. `You cannot think of
you think of this?' he asked in a low voice. -- `Let him have it going out in such weather as this.' -- `Oh, I am not afraid of
-- let him have it,' she said. `If he returns to Beaucaire thunder,' said the jeweller. -- `And then there are robbers,'
without the diamond, he will inform against us, and, as he said La Carconte. `The road is never very safe during fair
says, who knows if we shall ever again see the Abbe Busoni? time.' -- `Oh, as to the robbers,' said Joannes, `here is
-- in all probability we shall never see him.' -- `Well, then, so something for them,' and he drew from his pocket a pair of
I will!' said Caderousse; `so you may have the diamond for small pistols, loaded to the muzzle. `Here,' said he, `are dogs
45,000 francs. But my wife wants a gold chain, and I want a who bark and bite at the same time, they are for the two first
pair of silver buckles.' The jeweller drew from his pocket a who shall have a longing for your diamond, Friend
long flat box, which contained several samples of the articles Caderousse.'
demanded. `Here,' he said, `I am very straightforward in my
"Caderousse and his wife again interchanged a meaning look.
dealings -- take your choice.' The woman selected a gold
It seemed as though they were both inspired at the same
chain worth about five louis, and the husband a pair of
time with some horrible thought. `Well, then, a good journey
buckles. worth perhaps fifteen francs. -- `I hope you will not
to you,' said Caderousse. -- `Thanks,' replied the jeweller. He
complain now?' said the jeweller.
then took his cane, which he had placed against an old
"`The abbe told me it was worth 50,000 francs,' muttered cupboard, and went out. At the moment when he opened the
Caderousse. `Come, come -- give it to me! What a strange door, such a gust of wind came in that the lamp was nearly
fellow you are,' said the jeweller, taking the diamond from extinguished. `Oh,' said he, `this is very nice weather, and
his hand. `I give you 45,000 francs -- that is, 2,500 livres of two leagues to go in such a storm.' -- `Remain,' said
income, -- a fortune such as I wish I had myself, and you are Caderousse. `You can sleep here.' -- `Yes; do stay,' added La
not satisfied!' -- `And the five and forty thousand francs,' Carconte in a tremulous voice; `we will take every care of
inquired Caderousse in a hoarse voice, `where are they? you.' -- `No; I must sleep at Beaucaire. So, once more,
Come -- let us see them.' -- `Here they are,' replied the good-night.' Caderousse followed him slowly to the
jeweller, and he counted out upon the table 15,000 francs in threshold. `I can see neither heaven nor earth,' said the
186

jeweller, who was outside the door. `Do I turn to the right, or
to the left hand?' -- `To the right,' said Caderousse. `You
cannot go wrong -- the road is bordered by trees on both
sides.' -- `Good -- all right,' said a voice almost lost in the
distance. `Close the door,' said La Carconte; `I do not like
open doors when it thunders.' -- `Particularly when there is
money in the house, eh?' answered Caderousse,
double-locking the door.
"He came into the room, went to the cupboard, took out the
bag and pocket-book, and both began, for the third time, to
count their gold and bank-notes. I never saw such an
expression of cupidity as the flickering lamp revealed in
those two countenances. The woman, especially, was
hideous; her usual feverish tremulousness was intensified,
her countenance had become livid, and her eyes resembled
burning coals. `Why,' she inquired in a hoarse voice, `did
you invite him to sleep here to-night?' -- `Why?' said
Caderousse with a shudder; `why, that he might not have
the trouble of returning to Beaucaire.' -- `Ah,' responded the
woman, with an expression impossible to describe; `I
thought it was for something else.' -- `Woman, woman -why do you have such ideas?' cried Caderousse; `or, if you
have them, why don't you keep them to yourself?' -- `Well,'
said La Carconte, after a moment's pause, `you are not a
man.' -- `What do you mean?' added Caderousse. -- `If you
had been a man, you would not have let him go from here.'
-- `Woman!' -- `Or else he should not have reached
Beaucaire.' -- `Woman!' -- `The road takes a turn -- he is

obliged to follow it -- while alongside of the canal there is a
shorter road.' -- `Woman! -- you offend the good God. There
-- listen!' And at this moment there was a tremendous peal of
thunder, while the livid lightning illumined the room, and
the thunder, rolling away in the distance, seemed to
withdraw unwillingly from the cursed abode. `Mercy!' said
Caderousse, crossing himself.
"At the same moment, and in the midst of the terrifying
silence which usually follows a clap of thunder, they heard a
knocking at the door. Caderousse and his wife started and
looked aghast at each other. `Who's there?' cried Caderousse,
rising, and drawing up in a heap the gold and notes
scattered over the table, and which he covered with his two
hands. -- `It is I,' shouted a voice. -- `And who are you?' -`Eh, pardieu, Joannes, the jeweller.' -- `Well, and you said I
offended the good God,' said La Carconte with a horrid
smile. `Why, the good God sends him back again.'
Caderousse sank pale and breathless into his chair. La
Carconte, on the contrary, rose, and going with a firm step
towards the door, opened it, saying, as she did so -- `Come
in, dear M. Joannes.' -- `Ma foi,' said the jeweller, drenched
with rain, `I am not destined to return to Beaucaire to-night.
The shortest follies are best, my dear Caderousse. You
offered me hospitality, and I accept it, and have returned to
sleep beneath your friendly roof.' Caderousse stammered
out something, while he wiped away the sweat that started
to his brow. La Carconte doubled-locked the door behind the
jeweller.A

187


CHAPTER 45


Chapter 45

"A

THE RAIN OF BLOOD

The Rain Of Blood

s the jeweller returned to the apartment, he cast
around him a scrutinizing glance -- but there was
nothing to excite suspicion, if it did not exist, or to confirm it,
if it were already awakened. Caderousse's hands still
grasped the gold and bank-notes, and La Carconte called up
her sweetest smiles while welcoming the reappearance of
their guest. `Well, well,' said the jeweller, `you seem, my
good friends, to have had some fears respecting the accuracy
of your money, by counting it over so carefully directly I was
gone.' -- `Oh, no,' answered Caderousse, `that was not my
reason, I can assure you; but the circumstances by which we
have become possessed of this wealth are so unexpected, as
to make us scarcely credit our good fortune, and it is only by
placing the actual proof of our riches before our eyes that we
can persuade ourselves that the whole affair is not a dream.'
The jeweller smiled. -- `Have you any other guests in your
house?' inquired he. -- `Nobody but ourselves,' replied
Caderousse; `the fact is, we do not lodge travellers -- indeed,
our tavern is so near the town, that nobody would think of
stopping here. -- `Then I am afraid I shall very much
inconvenience you.' -- `Inconvenience us? Not at all, my dear
sir,' said La Carconte in her most gracious manner. `Not at
all, I assure you.' -- `But where will you manage to stow me?'
-- `In the chamber overhead.' -- `Surely that is where you
yourselves sleep?' -- `Never mind that; we have a second bed
in the adjoining room.' Caderousse stared at his wife with
much astonishment.

wretched night of it.'
"The jeweller began eating his supper, and the woman, who
was ordinarily so querulous and indifferent to all who
approached her, was suddenly transformed into the most
smiling and attentive hostess. Had the unhappy man on
whom she lavished her assiduities been previously
acquainted with her, so sudden an alteration might well
have excited suspicion in his mind, or at least have greatly
astonished him. Caderousse, meanwhile, continued to pace
the room in gloomy silence, sedulously avoiding the sight of
his guest; but as soon as the stranger had completed his
repast, the agitated inn-keeper went eagerly to the door and
opened it. `I believe the storm is over,' said he. But as if to
contradict his statement, at that instant a violent clap of
thunder seemed to shake the house to its very foundation,
while a sudden gust of wind, mingled with rain,
extinguished the lamp he held in his hand. Trembling and
awe-struck, Caderousse hastily shut the door and returned
to his guest, while La Carconte lighted a candle by the
smouldering ashes that glimmered on the hearth. `You must
be tired,' said she to the jeweller; `I have spread a pair of
white sheets on your bed; go up when you are ready, and
sleep well.'

"Joannes stayed for a while to see whether the storm seemed
to abate in its fury, but a brief space of time sufficed to
assure him that, instead of diminishing, the violence of the
rain and thunder momentarily increased; resigning himself,
"The jeweller, meanwhile, was humming a song as he stood
therefore, to what seemed inevitable, he bade his host
warming his back at the fire La Carconte had kindled to dry
good-night, and mounted the stairs. He passed over my
the wet garments of her guest; and this done, she next
head and I heard the flooring creak beneath his footsteps.
occupied herself in arranging his supper, by spreading a
The quick, eager glance of La Carconte followed him as he
napkin at the end of the table, and placing on it the slender
ascended, while Caderousse, on the contrary, turned his
remains of their dinner, to which she added three or four
back, and seemed most anxiously to avoid even glancing at
fresh-laid eggs. Caderousse had once more parted with his
him.
treasure -- the banknotes were replaced in the pocket-book,
the gold put back into the bag, and the whole carefully "All these circumstances did not strike me as painfully at the
locked in the cupboard. He then began pacing the room with time as they have since done; in fact, all that had happened
a pensive and gloomy air, glancing from time to time at the (with the exception of the story of the diamond, which
jeweller, who stood reeking with the steam from his wet certainly did wear an air of improbability), appeared natural
clothes, and merely changing his place on the warm hearth, enough, and called for neither apprehension nor mistrust;
but, worn out as I was with fatigue, and fully purposing to
to enable the whole of his garments to be dried.
proceed onwards directly the tempest abated, I determined
"`There,' said La Carconte, as she placed a bottle of wine on
to obtain a few hours' sleep. Overhead I could accurately
the table, `supper is ready whenever you are.' -- `And you?'
distinguish every movement of the jeweller, who, after
asked Joannes. -- `I don't want any supper,' said Caderousse.
making the best arrangements in his power for passing a
-- `We dined so very late,' hastily interposed La Carconte. -comfortable night, threw himself on his bed, and I could
`Then it seems I am to eat alone,' remarked the jeweller. -hear it creak and groan beneath his weight. Insensibly my
`Oh, we shall have the pleasure of waiting upon you,'
eyelids grew heavy, deep sleep stole over me, and having no
answered La Carconte, with an eager attention she was not
suspicion of anything wrong, I sought not to shake it off. I
accustomed to manifest even to guests who paid for what
looked into the kitchen once more and saw Caderousse
they took.
sitting by the side of a long table upon one of the low
"From time to time Caderousse darted on his wife keen, wooden stools which in country places are frequently used
searching glances, but rapid as the lightning flash. The storm instead of chairs; his back was turned towards me, so that I
still continued. `There, there,' said La Carconte; `do you hear could not see the expression of his countenance -- neither
that? upon my word, you did well to come back.' -- should I have been able to do so had he been placed
`Nevertheless,' replied the jeweller, `if by the time I have differently, as his head was buried between his two hands.
finished my supper the tempest has at all abated, I shall La Carconte continued to gaze on him for some time, then
make another start.' -- `It's the mistral,' said Caderousse, `and shrugging her shoulders, she took her seat immediately
it will be sure to last till to-morrow morning.' He sighed opposite to him. At this moment the expiring embers threw
heavily. -- `Well,' said the jeweller, as he placed himself at up a fresh flame from the kindling of a piece of wood that
table, `all I can say is, so much the worse for those who are lay near, and a bright light flashed over the room. La
abroad.' -- `Yes,' chimed in La Carconte, `they will have a Carconte still kept her eyes fixed on her husband, but as he
made no sign of changing his position, she extended her
188

hard, bony hand, and touched him on the forehead.

was plunged up to the handle.

"Caderousse shuddered. The woman's lips seemed to move,
as though she were talking; but because she merely spoke in
an undertone, or my senses were dulled by sleep, I did not
catch a word she uttered. Confused sights and sounds
seemed to float before me, and gradually I fell into a deep,
heavy slumber. How long I had been in this unconscious
state I know not, when I was suddenly aroused by the report
of a pistol, followed by a fearful cry. Weak and tottering
footsteps resounded across the chamber above me, and the
next instant a dull, heavy weight seemed to fall powerless on
the staircase. I had not yet fully recovered consciousness,
when again I heard groans, mingled with half-stifled cries, as
if from persons engaged in a deadly struggle. A cry more
prolonged than the others and ending in a series of groans
effectually roused me from my drowsy lethargy. Hastily
raising myself on one arm, I looked around, but all was dark;
and it seemed to me as if the rain must have penetrated
through the flooring of the room above, for some kind of
moisture appeared to fall, drop by drop, upon my forehead,
and when I passed my hand across my brow, I felt that it
was wet and clammy.

"I stumbled over some object; I stooped to examine -- it was
the second pistol, which had not gone off, probably from the
powder being wet. I approached the jeweller, who was not
quite dead, and at the sound of my footsteps and the
creaking of the floor, he opened his eyes, fixed them on me
with an anxious and inquiring gaze, moved his lips as
though trying to speak, then, overcome by the effort, fell
back and expired. This appalling sight almost bereft me of
my senses, and finding that I could no longer be of service to
any one in the house, my only desire was to fly. I rushed
towards the staircase, clutching my hair, and uttering a
groan of horror. Upon reaching the room below, I found five
or six custom-house officers, and two or three gendarmes -all heavily armed. They threw themselves upon me. I made
no resistance; I was no longer master of my senses. When I
strove to speak, a few inarticulate sounds alone escaped my
lips.

"As I noticed the significant manner in which the whole
party pointed to my blood-stained garments, I involuntarily
surveyed myself, and then I discovered that the thick warm
drops that had so bedewed me as I lay beneath the staircase
"To the fearful noises that had awakened me had succeeded must have been the blood of La Carconte. I pointed to the
the most perfect silence -- unbroken, save by the footsteps of spot where I had concealed myself. `What does he mean?'
a man walking about in the chamber above. The staircase asked a gendarme. One of the officers went to the place I
creaked, he descended into the room below, approached the directed. `He means,' replied the man upon his return, `that
fire and lit a candle. The man was Caderousse -- he was pale he got in that way;' and he showed the hole I had made
and his shirt was all blood. Having obtained the light, he when I broke through.
hurried up-stairs again, and once more I heard his rapid and
"Then I saw that they took me for the assassin. I recovered
uneasy footsteps. A moment later he came down again,
force and energy enough to free myself from the hands of
holding in his hand the small shagreen case, which he
those who held me, while I managed to stammer forth -- `I
opened, to assure himself it contained the diamond, -did not do it! Indeed, indeed I did not!' A couple of
seemed to hesitate as to which pocket he should put it in,
gendarmes held the muzzles of their carbines against my
then, as if dissatisfied with the security of either pocket, he
breast. -- `Stir but a step,' said they, `and you are a dead
deposited it in his red handkerchief, which he carefully
man.' -- `Why should you threaten me with death,' cried I,
rolled round his head. After this he took from his cupboard
`when I have already declared my innocence?' -- `Tush, tush,'
the bank-notes and gold he had put there, thrust the one into
cried the men; `keep your innocent stories to tell to the judge
the pocket of his trousers, and the other into that of his
at Nimes. Meanwhile, come along with us; and the best
waistcoat, hastily tied up a small bundle of linen, and
advice we can give you is to do so unresistingly.' Alas,
rushing towards the door, disappeared in the darkness of the
resistance was far from my thoughts. I was utterly
night.
overpowered by surprise and terror; and without a word I
"Then all became clear and manifest to me, and I reproached suffered myself to be handcuffed and tied to a horse's tail,
myself with what had happened, as though I myself had and thus they took me to Nimes.
done the guilty deed. I fancied that I still heard faint moans,
"I had been tracked by a customs-officer, who had lost sight
and imagining that the unfortunate jeweller might not be
of me near the tavern; feeling certain that I intended to pass
quite dead, I determined to go to his relief, by way of
the night there, he had returned to summon his comrades,
atoning in some slight degree, not for the crime I had
who just arrived in time to hear the report of the pistol, and
committed, but for that which I had not endeavored to
to take me in the midst of such circumstantial proofs of my
prevent. For this purpose I applied all the strength I
guilt as rendered all hopes of proving my innocence utterly
possessed to force an entrance from the cramped spot in
futile. One only chance was left me, that of beseeching the
which I lay to the adjoining room. The poorly fastened
magistrate before whom I was taken to cause every inquiry
boards which alone divided me from it yielded to my efforts,
to be made for the Abbe Busoni, who had stopped at the inn
and I found myself in the house. Hastily snatching up the
of the Pont du Gard on that morning. If Caderousse had
lighted candle, I hurried to the staircase; about midway a
invented the story relative to the diamond, and there existed
body was lying quite across the stairs. It was that of La
no such person as the Abbe Busoni, then, indeed, I was lost
Carconte. The pistol I had heard had doubtless been fired at
past redemption, or, at least, my life hung upon the feeble
her. The shot had frightfully lacerated her throat, leaving
chance of Caderousse himself being apprehended and
two gaping wounds from which, as well as the mouth, the
confessing the whole truth. Two months passed away in
blood was pouring in floods. She was stone dead. I strode
hopeless expectation on my part, while I must do the
past her, and ascended to the sleeping chamber, which
magistrate the justice to say that he used every means to
presented an appearance of the wildest disorder. The
obtain information of the person I declared could exculpate
furniture had been knocked over in the deadly struggle that
me if he would. Caderousse still evaded all pursuit, and I
had taken place there, and the sheets, to which the
had resigned myself to what seemed my inevitable fate. My
unfortunate jeweller had doubtless clung, were dragged
trial was to come on at the approaching assizes; when, on the
across the room. The murdered man lay on the floor, his
8th of September -- that is to say, precisely three months and
head leaning against the wall, and about him was a pool of
five days after the events which had perilled my life -- the
blood which poured forth from three large wounds in his
Abbe Busoni, whom I never ventured to believe I should see,
breast; there was a fourth gash, in which a long table knife
presented himself at the prison doors, saying he understood
189


CHAPTER 45


THE RAIN OF BLOOD

one of the prisoners wished to speak to him; he added, that
having learned at Marseilles the particulars of my
imprisonment, he hastened to comply with my desire. You
may easily imagine with what eagerness I welcomed him,
and how minutely I related the whole of what I had seen and
heard. I felt some degree of nervousness as I entered upon
the history of the diamond, but, to my inexpressible
astonishment, he confirmed it in every particular, and to my
equal surprise, he seemed to place entire belief in all I said.
And then it was that, won by his mild charity, seeing that he
was acquainted with all the habits and customs of my own
country, and considering also that pardon for the only crime
of which I was really guilty might come with a double power
from lips so benevolent and kind, I besought him to receive
my confession, under the seal of which I recounted the
Auteuil affair in all its details, as well as every other
transaction of my life. That which I had done by the impulse
of my best feelings produced the same effect as though it
had been the result of calculation. My voluntary confession
of the assassination at Auteuil proved to him that I had not
committed that of which I stood accused. When he quitted
me, he bade me be of good courage, and to rely upon his
doing all in his power to convince my judges of my
innocence.

"Alas, I have still to recount the most distressing period of
my life. Anxious as you may suppose I was to behold and
comfort my dear sister, I lost no time in hastening to Corsica,
but when I arrived at Rogliano I found a house of mourning,
the consequences of a scene so horrible that the neighbors
remember and speak of it to this day. Acting by my advice,
my poor sister had refused to comply with the unreasonable
demands of Benedetto, who was continually tormenting her
for money, as long as he believed there was a sou left in her
possession. One morning that he had demanded money,
threatening her with the severest consequences if she did not
supply him with what he desired, he disappeared and
remained away all day, leaving the kind-hearted Assunta,
who loved him as if he were her own child, to weep over his
conduct and bewail his absence. Evening came, and still,
with all the patient solicitude of a mother, she watched for
his return.
"As the eleventh hour struck, he entered with a swaggering
air, attended by two of the most dissolute and reckless of his
boon companions. She stretched out her arms to him, but
they seized hold of her, and one of the three -- none other
than the accursed Benedetto exclaimed, -- `Put her to torture
and she'll soon tell us where her money is.'

"It unfortunately happened that our neighbor, Vasilio, was at
Bastia, leaving no person in his house but his wife; no
human creature beside could hear or see anything that took
place within our dwelling. Two held poor Assunta, who,
unable to conceive that any harm was intended to her,
smiled in the face of those who were soon to become her
executioners. The third proceeded to barricade the doors and
windows, then returned, and the three united in stifling the
cries of terror incited by the sight of these preparations, and
then dragged Assunta feet foremost towards the brazier,
expecting to wring from her an avowal of where her
supposed treasure was secreted. In the struggle her clothes
caught fire, and they were obliged to let go their hold in
"And then it was, I presume," said Monte Cristo "that you order to preserve themselves from sharing the same fate.
came to me as the bearer of a letter from the Abbe Busoni?"
Covered with flames, Assunta rushed wildly to the door, but
it was fastened; she flew to the windows, but they were also
"It was, your excellency; the benevolent abbe took an evident
secured; then the neighbors heard frightful shrieks; it was
interest in all that concerned me.
Assunta calling for help. The cries died away in groans, and
"`Your mode of life as a smuggler,' said he to me one day, next morning, as soon as Vasilio's wife could muster up
`will be the ruin of you; if you get out, don't take it up again.' courage to venture abroad, she caused the door of our
-- `But how,' inquired I, `am I to maintain myself and my dwelling to be opened by the public authorities, when
poor sister?'
Assunta, although dreadfully burnt, was found still
"`A person, whose confessor I am,' replied he, `and who breathing; every drawer and closet in the house had been
entertains a high regard for me, applied to me a short time forced open, and the money stolen. Benedetto never again
since to procure him a confidential servant. Would you like appeared at Rogliano, neither have I since that day either
such a post? If so, I will give you a letter of introduction to seen or heard anything concerning him.
him.' -- `Oh, father,' I exclaimed, `you are very good.'
"It was subsequently to these dreadful events that I waited
"`But you must swear solemnly that I shall never have on your excellency, to whom it would have been folly to
reason to repent my recommendation.' I extended my hand, have mentioned Benedetto, since all trace of him seemed
and was about to pledge myself by any promise he would entirely lost; or of my sister, since she was dead."
"I had speedy proofs that the excellent abbe was engaged in
my behalf, for the rigors of my imprisonment were
alleviated by many trifling though acceptable indulgences,
and I was told that my trial was to be postponed to the
assizes following those now being held. In the interim it
pleased providence to cause the apprehension of Caderousse,
who was discovered in some distant country, and brought
back to France, where he made a full confession, refusing to
make the fact of his wife's having suggested and arranged
the murder any excuse for his own guilt. The wretched man
was sentenced to the galleys for life, and I was immediately
set at liberty."

dictate, but he stopped me. `It is unnecessary for you to bind
yourself by any vow,' said he; `I know and admire the
Corsican nature too well to fear you. Here, take this,'
continued he, after rapidly writing the few lines I brought to
your excellency, and upon receipt of which you deigned to
receive me into your service, and proudly I ask whether your
excellency has ever had cause to repent having done so?"
"No," replied the count; "I take pleasure in saying that you
have served me faithfully, Bertuccio; but you might have
shown more confidence in me."
"I, your excellency?"
"Yes; you. How comes it, that having both a sister and an
adopted son, you have never spoken to me of either?"
190

"And in what light did you view the occurrence?" inquired
Monte Cristo.
"As a punishment for the crime I had committed," answered
Bertuccio. "Oh, those Villeforts are an accursed race!"
"Truly they are," murmured the count in a lugubrious tone.
"And now," resumed Bertuccio, "your excellency may,
perhaps, be able to comprehend that this place, which I
revisit for the first time -- this garden, the actual scene of my
crime -- must have given rise to reflections of no very
agreeable nature, and produced that gloom and depression
of spirits which excited the notice of your excellency, who
was pleased to express a desire to know the cause. At this
instant a shudder passes over me as I reflect that possibly I

am now standing on the very grave in which lies M. de
Villefort, by whose hand the ground was dug to receive the
corpse of his child."
"Everything is possible," said Monte Cristo, rising from the
bench on which he had been sitting; "even," he added in an
inaudible voice, "even that the procureur be not dead. The
Abbe Busoni did right to send you to me," he went on in his
ordinary tone, "and you have done well in relating to me the
whole of your history, as it will prevent my forming any
erroneous opinions concerning you in future. As for that
Benedetto, who so grossly belied his name, have you never
made any effort to trace out whither he has gone, or what
has become of him?"
"No; far from wishing to learn whither he has betaken
himself, I should shun the possibility of meeting him as I
would a wild beast. Thank God, I have never heard his name
mentioned by any person, and I hope and believe he is
dead."
"Do not think so, Bertuccio," replied the count; "for the
wicked are not so easily disposed of, for God seems to have
them under his special watch-care to make of them
instruments of his vengeance."
"So be it," responded Bertuccio, "all I ask of heaven is that I
may never see him again. And now, your excellency," he
added, bowing his head, "you know everything -- you are
my judge on earth, as the Almighty is in heaven; have you
for me no words of consolation?"
"My good friend, I can only repeat the words addressed to
you by the Abbe Busoni. Villefort merited punishment for
what he had done to you, and, perhaps, to others. Benedetto,
if still living, will become the instrument of divine
retribution in some way or other, and then be duly punished
in his turn. As far as you yourself are concerned, I see but
one point in which you are really guilty. Ask yourself,
wherefore, after rescuing the infant from its living grave, you
did not restore it to its mother? There was the crime,
Bertuccio -- that was where you became really culpable."
"True, excellency, that was the crime, the real crime, for in
that I acted like a coward. My first duty, directly I had
succeeded in recalling the babe to life, was to restore it to its
mother; but, in order to do so, I must have made close and
careful inquiry, which would, in all probability, have led to
my own apprehension; and I clung to life, partly on my
sister's account, and partly from that feeling of pride inborn
in our hearts of desiring to come off untouched and
victorious in the execution of our vengeance. Perhaps, too,
the natural and instinctive love of life made me wish to
avoid endangering my own. And then, again, I am not as
brave and courageous as was my poor brother." Bertuccio
hid his face in his hands as he uttered these words, while
Monte Cristo fixed on him a look of inscrutable meaning.
After a brief silence, rendered still more solemn by the time
and place, the count said, in a tone of melancholy wholly
unlike his usual manner, "In order to bring this conversation
to a fitting termination (the last we shall ever hold upon this
subject), I will repeat to you some words I have heard from
the lips of the Abbe Busoni. For all evils there are two
remedies -- time and silence. And now leave me, Monsieur
Bertuccio, to walk alone here in the garden. The very
circumstances which inflict on you, as a principal in the
tragic scene enacted here, such painful emotions, are to me,
on the contrary, a source of something like contentment, and
serve but to enhance the value of this dwelling in my
estimation. The chief beauty of trees consists in the deep
shadow of their umbrageous boughs, while fancy pictures a
moving multitude of shapes and forms flitting and passing
beneath that shade. Here I have a garden laid out in such a

way as to afford the fullest scope for the imagination, and
furnished with thickly grown trees, beneath whose leafy
screen a visionary like myself may conjure up phantoms at
will. This to me, who expected but to find a blank enclosure
surrounded by a straight wall, is, I assure you, a most
agreeable surprise. I have no fear of ghosts, and I have never
heard it said that so much harm had been done by the dead
during six thousand years as is wrought by the living in a
single day. Retire within, Bertuccio, and tranquillize your
mind. Should your confessor be less indulgent to you in
your dying moments than you found the Abbe Busoni, send
for me, if I am still on earth, and I will soothe your ears with
words that shall effectually calm and soothe your parting
soul ere it goes forth to traverse the ocean called eternity."
Bertuccio bowed respectfully, and turned away, sighing
heavily. Monte Cristo, left alone, took three or four steps
onwards, and murmured, "Here, beneath this plane-tree,
must have been where the infant's grave was dug. There is
the little door opening into the garden. At this corner is the
private staircase communicating with the sleeping
apartment. There will be no necessity for me to make a note
of these particulars, for there, before my eyes, beneath my
feet, all around me, I have the plan sketched with all the
living reality of truth." After making the tour of the garden a
second time, the count re-entered his carriage, while
Bertuccio, who perceived the thoughtful expression of his
master's features, took his seat beside the driver without
uttering a word. The carriage proceeded rapidly towards
Paris.
That same evening, upon reaching his abode in the Champs
Elysees, the Count of Monte Cristo went over the whole
building with the air of one long acquainted with each nook
or corner. Nor, although preceding the party, did he once
mistake one door for another, or commit the smallest error
when choosing any particular corridor or staircase to
conduct him to a place or suite of rooms he desired to visit.
Ali was his principal attendant during this nocturnal survey.
Having given various orders to Bertuccio relative to the
improvements and alterations he desired to make in the
house, the Count, drawing out his watch, said to the
attentive Nubian, "It is half-past eleven o'clock; Haidee will
soon he here. Have the French attendants been summoned to
await her coming?" Ali extended his hands towards the
apartments destined for the fair Greek, which were so
effectually concealed by means of a tapestried entrance, that
it would have puzzled the most curious to have divined
their existence. Ali, having pointed to the apartments, held
up three fingers of his right hand, and then, placing it
beneath his head, shut his eyes, and feigned to sleep. "I
understand," said Monte Cristo, well acquainted with Ali's
pantomime; "you mean to tell me that three female
attendants
await
their
new
mistress
in
her
sleeping-chamber." Ali, with considerable animation, made a
sign in the affirmative.
"Madame will be tired to-night," continued Monte Cristo,
"and will, no doubt, wish to rest. Desire the French
attendants not to weary her with questions, but merely to
pay their respectful duty and retire. You will also see that the
Greek servants hold no communication with those of this
country." He bowed. Just at that moment voices were heard
hailing the concierge. The gate opened, a carriage rolled
down the avenue, and stopped at the steps. The count
hastily descended, presented himself at the already opened
carriage door, and held out his hand to a young woman,
completely enveloped in a green silk mantle heavily
embroidered with gold. She raised the hand extended
towards her to her lips, and kissed it with a mixture of love
and respect. Some few words passed between them in that
191


CHAPTER 45


THE RAIN OF BLOOD

sonorous language in which Homer makes his gods
converse. The young woman spoke with an expression of
deep tenderness, while the count replied with an air of
gentle gravity. Preceded by Ali, who carried a rose-colored
flambeau in his hand, the new-comer, who was no other

192

than the lovely Greek who had been Monte Cristo's
companion in Italy, was conducted to her apartments, while
the count retired to the pavilion reserved for himself. In
another hour every light in the house was extinguished, and
it might have been thought that all its inmates slept.A


Chapter 46

Unlimited Credit

A

bout two o'clock the following day a calash, drawn by a
pair of magnificent English horses, stopped at the door
of Monte Cristo and a person, dressed in a blue coat, with
buttons of a similar color, a white waistcoat, over which was
displayed a massive gold chain, brown trousers, and a
quantity of black hair descending so low over his eyebrows
as to leave it doubtful whether it were not artificial so little
did its jetty glossiness assimilate with the deep wrinkles
stamped on his features -- a person, in a word, who,
although evidently past fifty, desired to be taken for not
more than forty, bent forwards from the carriage door, on
the panels of which were emblazoned the armorial bearings
of a baron, and directed his groom to inquire at the porter's
lodge whether the Count of Monte Cristo resided there, and
if he were within. While waiting, the occupant of the
carriage surveyed the house, the garden as far as he could
distinguish it, and the livery of servants who passed to and
fro, with an attention so close as to be somewhat impertinent.
His glance was keen but showed cunning rather than
intelligence; his lips were straight, and so thin that, as they
closed, they were drawn in over the teeth; his cheek-bones
were broad and projecting, a never-failing proof of audacity
and craftiness; while the flatness of his forehead, and the
enlargement of the back of his skull, which rose much higher
than his large and coarsely shaped ears, combined to form a
physiognomy anything but prepossessing, save in the eyes
of such as considered that the owner of so splendid an
equipage must needs be all that was admirable and enviable,
more especially when they gazed on the enormous diamond
that glittered in his shirt, and the red ribbon that depended
from his button-hole.

count in a tone of disgust, as he shut up his glass into its
ivory case. "How comes it that all do not retreat in aversion
at sight of that flat, receding, serpent-like forehead, round,
vulture-shaped head, and sharp-hooked nose, like the beak
of a buzzard? Ali," cried he, striking at the same time on the
brazen gong. Ali appeared. "Summon Bertuccio," said the
count. Almost immediately Bertuccio entered the apartment.
"Did your excellency desire to see me?" inquired he. "I did,"
replied the count. "You no doubt observed the horses
standing a few minutes since at the door?"
"Certainly, your excellency. I noticed them for their
remarkable beauty."
"Then how comes it," said Monte Cristo with a frown, "that,
when I desired you to purchase for me the finest pair of
horses to be found in Paris, there is another pair, fully as fine
as mine, not in my stables?" At the look of displeasure,
added to the angry tone in which the count spoke, Ali turned
pale and held down his head. "It is not your fault, my good
Ali," said the count in the Arabic language, and with a
gentleness none would have thought him capable of
showing, either in voice or face -- "it is not your fault. You do
not understand the points of English horses." The
countenance of poor Ali recovered its serenity. "Permit me to
assure your excellency," said Bertuccio, "that the horses you
speak of were not to be sold when I purchased yours."
Monte Cristo shrugged his shoulders. "It seems, sir steward,"
said he, "that you have yet to learn that all things are to be
sold to such as care to pay the price."
"His excellency is not, perhaps, aware that M. Danglars gave
16,000 francs for his horses?"

The groom, in obedience to his orders, tapped at the window "Very well. Then offer him double that sum; a banker never
of the porter's lodge, saying, "Pray, does not the Count of loses an opportunity of doubling his capital."
Monte Cristo live here?"
"Is your excellency really in earnest?" inquired the steward.
"His excellency does reside here," replied the concierge; "but" Monte Cristo regarded the person who durst presume to
-- added he, glancing an inquiring look at Ali. Ali returned a doubt his words with the look of one equally surprised and
sign in the negative. "But what?" asked the groom.
displeased. "I have to pay a visit this evening," replied he. "I
desire that these horses, with completely new harness, may
"His excellency does not receive visitors to-day."
be at the door with my carriage." Bertuccio bowed, and was
"Then here is my master's card, -- the Baron Danglars. You
about to retire; but when he reached the door, he paused,
will take it to the count, and say that, although in haste to
and then said, "At what o'clock does your excellency wish
attend the Chamber, my master came out of his way to have
the carriage and horses to be ready?"
the honor of calling upon him."
"I never speak to his excellency," replied the concierge; "the
valet de chambre will carry your message." The groom
returned to the carriage. "Well?" asked Danglars. The man,
somewhat crest-fallen by the rebuke he had received,
repeated what the concierge had said. "Bless me," murmured
Baron Danglars, "this must surely be a prince instead of a
count by their styling him `excellency,' and only venturing to
address him by the medium of his valet de chambre.
However, it does not signify; he has a letter of credit on me,
so I must see him when he requires his money."

"At five o'clock," replied the count.
"I beg your excellency's pardon," interposed the steward in a
deprecating manner, "for venturing to observe that it is
already two o'clock."

"I am perfectly aware of that fact," answered Monte Cristo
calmly. Then, turning towards Ali, he said, "Let all the horses
in my stables be led before the windows of your young lady,
that she may select those she prefers for her carriage.
Request her also to oblige me by saying whether it is her
Then, throwing himself back in his carriage, Danglars called pleasure to dine with me; if so, let dinner be served in her
out to his coachman, in a voice that might be heard across apartments. Now, leave me, and desire my valet de chambre
the road, "To the Chamber of Deputies."
to come hither." Scarcely had Ali disappeared when the valet
Apprised in time of the visit paid him, Monte Cristo had, entered the chamber. "Monsieur Baptistin," said the count,
from behind the blinds of his pavilion, as minutely observed "you have been in my service one year, the time I generally
the baron, by means of an excellent lorgnette, as Danglars give myself to judge of the merits or demerits of those about
himself had scrutinized the house, garden, and servants. me. You suit me very well." Baptistin bowed low. "It only
"That fellow has a decidedly bad countenance," said the remains for me to know whether I also suit you?"
193


CHAPTER 46


UNLIMITED CREDIT

"Oh, your excellency!" exclaimed Baptistin eagerly.
"Listen, if you please, till I have finished speaking," replied
Monte Cristo. "You receive 1,500 francs per annum for your
services here -- more than many a brave subaltern, who
continually risks his life for his country, obtains. You live in
a manner far superior to many clerks who work ten times
harder than you do for their money. Then, though yourself a
servant, you have other servants to wait upon you, take care
of your clothes, and see that your linen is duly prepared for
you. Again, you make a profit upon each article you
purchase for my toilet, amounting in the course of a year to a
sum equalling your wages."
"Nay, indeed, your excellency."
"I am not condemning you for this, Monsieur Baptistin; but
let your profits end here. It would be long indeed ere you
would find so lucrative a post as that you have how the
good fortune to fill. I neither ill-use nor ill-treat my servants
by word or action. An error I readily forgive, but wilful
negligence or forgetfulness, never. My commands are
ordinarily short, clear, and precise; and I would rather be
obliged to repeat my words twice, or even three times, than
they should be misunderstood. I am rich enough to know
whatever I desire to know, and I can promise you I am not
wanting in curiosity. If, then, I should learn that you had
taken upon yourself to speak of me to any one favorably or
unfavorably, to comment on my actions, or watch my
conduct, that very instant you would quit my service. You
may now retire. I never caution my servants a second time -remember that." Baptistin bowed, and was proceeding
towards the door. "I forgot to mention to you," said the count,
"that I lay yearly aside a certain sum for each servant in my
establishment; those whom I am compelled to dismiss lose
(as a matter of course) all participation in this money, while
their portion goes to the fund accumulating for those
domestics who remain with me, and among whom it will be
divided at my death. You have been in my service a year,
your fund has already begun to accumulate -- let it continue
to do so."

"They are at the door harnessed to the carriage as your
excellency desired. Does your excellency wish me to
accompany him?"
"No, the coachman, Ali, and Baptistin will go." The count
descended to the door of his mansion, and beheld his
carriage drawn by the very pair of horses he had so much
admired in the morning as the property of Danglars. As he
passed them he said -- "They are extremely handsome
certainly, and you have done well to purchase them,
although you were somewhat remiss not to have procured
them sooner."
"Indeed, your excellency, I had very considerable difficulty
in obtaining them, and, as it is, they have cost an enormous
price."
"Does the sum you gave for them make the animals less
beautiful," inquired the count, shrugging his shoulders.
"Nay, if your excellency is satisfied, it is all that I could wish.
Whither does your excellency desire to be driven?"
"To the residence of Baron Danglars, Rue de la Chaussee
d'Antin." This conversation had passed as they stood upon
the terrace, from which a flight of stone steps led to the
carriage-drive. As Bertuccio, with a respectful bow, was
moving away, the count called him back. "I have another
commission for you, M. Bertuccio," said he; "I am desirous of
having an estate by the seaside in Normandy -- for instance,
between Havre and Boulogne. You see I give you a wide
range. It will be absolutely necessary that the place you may
select have a small harbor, creek, or bay, into which my
corvette can enter and remain at anchor. She draws only
fifteen feet. She must be kept in constant readiness to sail
immediately I think proper to give the signal. Make the
requisite inquiries for a place of this description, and when
you have met with an eligible spot, visit it, and if it possess
the advantages desired, purchase it at once in your own
name. The corvette must now, I think, be on her way to
Fecamp, must she not?"

"Certainly, your excellency; I saw her put to sea the same
This address, delivered in the presence of Ali, who, not evening we quitted Marseilles."
understanding one word of the language in which it was "And the yacht."
spoken, stood wholly unmoved, produced an effect on M.
Baptistin only to be conceived by such as have occasion to "Was ordered to remain at Martigues."
study the character and disposition of French domestics. "I "'Tis well. I wish you to write from time to time to the
assure your excellency," said he, "that at least it shall be my captains in charge of the two vessels so as to keep them on
study to merit your approbation in all things, and I will take the alert."
M. Ali as my model."
"And the steamboat?"
"By no means," replied the count in the most frigid tones;
"She is at Chalons?"
"Ali has many faults mixed with most excellent qualities. He
cannot possibly serve you as a pattern for your conduct, not "Yes."
being, as you are, a paid servant, but a mere slave -- a dog, "The same orders for her as for the two sailing vessels."
who, should he fail in his duty towards me, I should not
discharge from my service, but kill." Baptistin opened his "Very good."
eyes with astonishment.
"When you have purchased the estate I desire, I want
"You seem incredulous," said Monte Cristo who repeated to constant relays of horses at ten leagues apart along the
Ali in the Arabic language what he had just been saying to northern and southern road."
Baptistin in French. The Nubian smiled assentingly to his
master's words, then, kneeling on one knee, respectfully
kissed the hand of the count. This corroboration of the lesson
he had just received put the finishing stroke to the wonder
and stupefaction of M. Baptistin. The count then motioned
the valet de chambre to retire, and to Ali to follow to his
study, where they conversed long and earnestly together. As
the hand of the clock pointed to five the count struck thrice
upon his gong. When Ali was wanted one stroke was given,
two summoned Baptistin, and three Bertuccio. The steward
entered. "My horses," said Monte Cristo.
194

"Your excellency may depend upon me." The Count made a
gesture of satisfaction, descended the terrace steps, and
sprang into his carriage, which was whirled along swiftly to
the banker's house. Danglars was engaged at that moment,
presiding over a railroad committee. But the meeting was
nearly concluded when the name of his visitor was
announced. As the count's title sounded on his ear he rose,
and addressing his colleagues, who were members of one or
the other Chamber, he said, -- "Gentlemen, pardon me for
leaving you so abruptly; but a most ridiculous circumstance
has occurred, which is this, -- Thomson & French, the Roman
bankers, have sent to me a certain person calling himself the

Count of Monte Cristo, and have given him an unlimited
credit with me. I confess this is the drollest thing I have ever
met with in the course of my extensive foreign transactions,
and you may readily suppose it has greatly roused my
curiosity. I took the trouble this morning to call on the
pretended count -- if he were a real count he wouldn't be so
rich. But, would you believe it, `He was not receiving.' So the
master of Monte Cristo gives himself airs befitting a great
millionaire or a capricious beauty. I made inquiries, and
found that the house in the Champs Elysees is his own
property, and certainly it was very decently kept up. But,"
pursued Danglars with one of his sinister smiles, "an order
for unlimited credit calls for something like caution on the
part of the banker to whom that order is given. I am very
anxious to see this man. I suspect a hoax is intended, but the
instigators of it little knew whom they had to deal with.
`They laugh best who laugh last!'"
Having delivered himself of this pompous address, uttered
with a degree of energy that left the baron almost out of
breath, he bowed to the assembled party and withdrew to
his drawing-room, whose sumptuous furnishings of white
and gold had caused a great sensation in the Chaussee
d'Antin. It was to this apartment he had desired his guest to
be shown, with the purpose of overwhelming him at the
sight of so much luxury. He found the count standing before
some copies of Albano and Fattore that had been passed off
to the banker as originals; but which, mere copies as they
were, seemed to feel their degradation in being brought into
juxtaposition with the gaudy colors that covered the ceiling.
The count turned round as he heard the entrance of Danglars
into the room. With a slight inclination of the head, Danglars
signed to the count to be seated, pointing significantly to a
gilded arm-chair, covered with white satin embroidered
with gold. The count sat down. "I have the honor, I presume,
of addressing M. de Monte Cristo."
The count bowed. "And I of speaking to Baron Danglars,
chevalier of the Legion of Honor, and member of the
Chamber of Deputies?"
Monte Cristo repeated all the titles he had read on the
baron's card.
Danglars felt the irony and compressed his lips. "You will, I
trust, excuse me, monsieur, for not calling you by your title
when I first addressed you," he said, "but you are aware that
we are living under a popular form of government, and that
I am myself a representative of the liberties of the people."
"So much so," replied Monte Cristo, "that while you call
yourself baron you are not willing to call anybody else
count."

"Permit me to inform you, Count," said he, bowing, "that I
have received a letter of advice from Thomson & French, of
Rome."
"I am glad to hear it, baron, -- for I must claim the privilege
of addressing you after the manner of your servants. I have
acquired the bad habit of calling persons by their titles from
living in a country where barons are still barons by right of
birth. But as regards the letter of advice, I am charmed to
find that it has reached you; that will spare me the
troublesome and disagreeable task of coming to you for
money myself. You have received a regular letter of advice?"
"Yes," said Danglars, "but I confess I didn't quite
comprehend its meaning."
"Indeed?"
"And for that reason I did myself the honor of calling upon
you, in order to beg for an explanation."
"Go on, monsieur. Here I am, ready to give you any
explanation you desire."
"Why," said Danglers, "in the letter -- I believe I have it about
me" -- here he felt in his breast-pocket -- "yes, here it is. Well,
this letter gives the Count of Monte Cristo unlimited credit
on our house."
"Well, baron, what is there difficult to understand about
that?"
"Merely the term unlimited -- nothing else, certainly."
"Is not that word known in France? The people who wrote
are Anglo-Germans, you know."
"Oh, as for the composition of the letter, there is nothing to
be said; but as regards the competency of the document, I
certainly have doubts."
"Is it possible?" asked the count, assuming all air and tone of
the utmost simplicity and candor. "Is it possible that
Thomson & French are not looked upon as safe and solvent
bankers? Pray tell me what you think, baron, for I feel
uneasy, I can assure you, having some considerable property
in their hands."
"Thomson & French are perfectly solvent," replied Danglars,
with an almost mocking smile: "but the word unlimited, in
financial affairs, is so extremely vague."
"Is, in fact, unlimited," said Monte Cristo.
"Precisely what I was about to say," cried Danglars. "Now
what is vague is doubtful; and it was a wise man who said,
`when in doubt, keep out.'"

"Meaning to say," rejoined Monte Cristo, "that however
"Upon my word, monsieur," said Danglars with affected Thomson & French may be inclined to commit acts of
carelessness, "I attach no sort of value to such empty imprudence and folly, the Baron Danglars is not disposed to
distinctions; but the fact is, I was made baron, and also follow their example."
chevalier of the Legion of Honor, in return for services "Not at all."
rendered, but" -"Plainly enough. Messrs. Thomson & French set no bounds
"But you have discarded your titles after the example set you to their engagements while those of M. Danglars have their
by Messrs. de Montmorency and Lafayette? That was a noble limits; he is a wise man, according to his own showing."
example to follow, monsieur."
"Monsieur," replied the banker, drawing himself up with a
"Why," replied Danglars, "not entirely so; with the servants, haughty air, "the extent of my resources has never yet been
-- you understand."
questioned."
"I see; to your domestics you are `my lord,' the journalists
style you `monsieur,' while your constituents call you
`citizen.' These are distinctions very suitable under a
constitutional government. I understand perfectly." Again
Danglars bit his lips; he saw that he was no match for Monte
Cristo in an argument of this sort, and he therefore hastened
to turn to subjects more congenial.

"It seems, then, reserved for me," said Monte Cristo coldly,
"to be the first to do so."
"By what right, sir?"
"By right of the objections you have raised, and the
explanations you have demanded, which certainly must
have some motive."
195


CHAPTER 46


UNLIMITED CREDIT

Once more Danglars bit his lips. It was the second time he
had been worsted, and this time on his own ground. His
forced politeness sat awkwardly upon him, and approached
almost to impertinence. Monte Cristo on the contrary,
preserved a graceful suavity of demeanor, aided by a certain
degree of simplicity he could assume at pleasure, and thus
possessed the advantage.
"Well, sir," resumed Danglars, after a brief silence, "I will
endeavor to make myself understood, by requesting you to
inform me for what sum you propose to draw upon me?"
"Why, truly," replied Monte Cristo, determined not to lose an
inch of the ground he had gained, "my reason for desiring an
`unlimited' credit was precisely because I did not know how
much money I might need."

each other -- for such I presume is the case?" Danglars
bowed assentingly. "You are quite sure that not a lurking
doubt or suspicion lingers in your mind?"
"Oh, my dear count," exclaimed Danglars, "I never for an
instant entertained such a feeling towards you."
"No, you merely wished to be convinced, nothing more; but
now that we have come to so clear an understanding, and
that all distrust and suspicion are laid at rest, we may as well
fix a sum as the probable expenditure of the first year,
suppose we say six millions to" -"Six millions!" gasped Danglars -- "so be it."

"Then, if I should require more," continued Monte Cristo in a
careless manner, "why, of course, I should draw upon you;
but my present intention is not to remain in France more
The banker thought the time had come for him to take the
than a year, and during that period I scarcely think I shall
upper hand. So throwing himself back in his arm-chair, he
exceed the sum I mentioned. However, we shall see. Be kind
said, with an arrogant and purse-proud air, -- "Let me beg of
enough, then, to send me 500,000 francs to-morrow. I shall
you not to hesitate in naming your wishes; you will then be
be at home till midday, or if not, I will leave a receipt with
convinced that the resources of the house of Danglars,
my steward."
however limited, are still equal to meeting the largest
"The money you desire shall be at your house by ten o'clock
demands; and were you even to require a million" -to-morrow morning, my dear count," replied Danglars.
"I beg your pardon," interposed Monte Cristo.
"How would you like to have it? in gold, silver, or notes?"
"I said a million," replied Danglars, with the confidence of
"Half in gold, and the other half in bank-notes, if you please,"
ignorance.
said the count, rising from his seat.
"But could I do with a million?" retorted the count. "My dear
"I must confess to you, count," said Danglars, "that I have
sir, if a trifle like that could suffice me, I should never have
hitherto imagined myself acquainted with the degree of all
given myself the trouble of opening an account. A million?
the great fortunes of Europe, and still wealth such as yours
Excuse my smiling when you speak of a sum I am in the
has been wholly unknown to me. May I presume to ask
habit of carrying in my pocket-book or dressing-case." And
whether you have long possessed it?"
with these words Monte Cristo took from his pocket a small
case containing his visiting-cards, and drew forth two orders "It has been in the family a very long while," returned Monte
on the treasury for 500,000 francs each, payable at sight to Cristo, "a sort of treasure expressly forbidden to be touched
the bearer. A man like Danglars was wholly inaccessible to for a certain period of years, during which the accumulated
any gentler method of correction. The effect of the present interest has doubled the capital. The period appointed by the
revelation was stunning; he trembled and was on the verge testator for the disposal of these riches occurred only a short
of apoplexy. The pupils of his eyes, as he gazed at Monte time ago, and they have only been employed by me within
the last few years. Your ignorance on the subject, therefore,
Cristo dilated horribly.
is easily accounted for. However, you will be better
"Come, come," said Monte Cristo, "confess honestly that you
informed as to me and my possessions ere long." And the
have not perfect confidence in Thomson & French. I
count, while pronouncing these latter words, accompanied
understand, and foreseeing that such might be the case, I
them with one of those ghastly smiles that used to strike
took, in spite of my ignorance of affairs, certain precautions.
terror into poor Franz d'Epinay.
See, here are two similar letters to that you have yourself
received; one from the house of Arstein & Eskeles of Vienna, "With your tastes, and means of gratifying them," continued
to Baron Rothschild, the other drawn by Baring of London, Danglars, "you will exhibit a splendor that must effectually
upon M. Laffitte. Now, sir, you have but to say the word, put us poor miserable millionaires quite in the shade. If I
and I will spare you all uneasiness by presenting my letter of mistake not you are an admirer of paintings, at least I judged
credit to one or other of these two firms." The blow had so from the attention you appeared to be bestowing on mine
struck home, and Danglars was entirely vanquished; with a when I entered the room. If you will permit me, I shall be
trembling hand he took the two letters from the count, who happy to show you my picture gallery, composed entirely of
held them carelessly between finger and thumb, and works by the ancient masters -- warranted as such. Not a
proceeded to scrutinize the signatures, with a minuteness modern picture among them. I cannot endure the modern
that the count might have regarded as insulting, had it not school of painting."
suited his present purpose to mislead the banker. "Oh, sir," "You are perfectly right in objecting to them, for this one
said Danglars, after he had convinced himself of the great fault -- that they have not yet had time to become old."
authenticity of the documents he held, and rising as if to
salute the power of gold personified in the man before him, "Or will you allow me to show you several fine statues by
-- "three letters of unlimited credit! I can be no longer Thorwaldsen, Bartoloni, and Canova? -- all foreign artists,
mistrustful, but you must pardon me, my dear count, for for, as you may perceive, I think but very indifferently of our
French sculptors."
confessing to some degree of astonishment."
"Nay," answered Monte Cristo, with the most gentlemanly "You have a right to be unjust to them, monsieur; they are
air, "'tis not for such trifling sums as these that your banking your compatriots."
house is to be incommoded. Then, you can let me have some
money, can you not?"
"Whatever you say, my dear count; I am at your orders."
"Why," replied Monte Cristo, "since we mutually understand
196

"But all this may come later, when we shall be better known
to each other. For the present, I will confine myself (if
perfectly agreeable to you) to introducing you to the
Baroness Danglars -- excuse my impatience, my dear count,
but a client like you is almost like a member of the family."

Monte Cristo bowed, in sign that he accepted the proffered
honor; Danglars rang and was answered by a servant in a
showy livery. "Is the baroness at home?" inquired Danglars.
"Yes, my lord," answered the man.
"And alone?"
"No, my lord, madame has visitors."
"Have you any objection to meet any persons who may be
with madame, or do you desire to preserve a strict
incognito?"

was Colonel the Marquis of Nargonne."
"I have not the honor of knowing Madame Danglars; but I
have already met M. Lucien Debray."
"Ah, indeed?" said Danglars; "and where was that?"
"At the house of M. de Morcerf."
"Ah, ha, you are acquainted with the young viscount, are
you?"
"We were together a good deal during the Carnival at
Rome."

"No, indeed," replied Monte Cristo with a smile, "I do not
"True, true," cried Danglars. "Let me see; have I not heard
arrogate to myself the right of so doing."
talk of some strange adventure with bandits or thieves hid in
"And who is with madame? -- M. Debray?" inquired ruins, and of his having had a miraculous escape? I forget
Danglars, with an air of indulgence and good-nature that how, but I know he used to amuse my wife and daughter by
made Monte Cristo smile, acquainted as he was with the telling them about it after his return from Italy."
secrets of the banker's domestic life.
"Her ladyship is waiting to receive you, gentlemen," said the
"Yes, my lord," replied the servant, "M. Debray is with servant, who had gone to inquire the pleasure of his mistress.
madame." Danglars nodded his head; then, turning to Monte "With your permission," said Danglars, bowing, "I will
Cristo, said, "M. Lucien Debray is an old friend of ours, and precede you, to show you the way."
private secretary to the Minister of the Interior. As for my
"By all means," replied Monte Cristo; "I follow you."
wife, I must tell you, she lowered herself by marrying me,
for she belongs to one of the most ancient families in France.
Her maiden name was De Servieres, and her first husband

197


CHAPTER 47


Chapter 47

THE DAPPLED GRAYS

The Dappled Grays

T

he baron, followed by the count, traversed a long series
of apartments, in which the prevailing characteristics
were heavy magnificence and the gaudiness of ostentatious
wealth, until he reached the boudoir of Madame Danglars -a small octagonal-shaped room, hung with pink satin,
covered with white Indian muslin. The chairs were of
ancient workmanship and materials; over the doors were
painted sketches of shepherds and shepherdesses, after the
style and manner of Boucher; and at each side pretty
medallions in crayons, harmonizing well with the
furnishings of this charming apartment, the only one
throughout the great mansion in which any distinctive taste
prevailed. The truth was, it had been entirely overlooked in
the plan arranged and followed out by M. Danglars and his
architect, who had been selected to aid the baron in the great
work of improvement solely because he was the most
fashionable and celebrated decorator of the day. The
decorations of the boudoir had then been left entirely to
Madame Danglars and Lucien Debray. M. Danglars,
however, while possessing a great admiration for the antique,
as it was understood during the time of the Directory,
entertained the most sovereign contempt for the simple
elegance of his wife's favorite sitting-room, where, by the
way, he was never permitted to intrude, unless, indeed, he
excused his own appearance by ushering in some more
agreeable visitor than himself; and even then he had rather
the air and manner of a person who was himself introduced,
than that of being the presenter of another, his reception
being cordial or frigid, in proportion as the person who
accompanied him chanced to please or displease the
baroness.
Madame Danglars (who, although past the first bloom of
youth, was still strikingly handsome) was now seated at the
piano, a most elaborate piece of cabinet and inlaid work,
while Lucien Debray, standing before a small work-table,
was turning over the pages of an album. Lucien had found
time, preparatory to the count's arrival, to relate many
particulars respecting him to Madame Danglars. It will be
remembered that Monte Cristo had made a lively impression
on the minds of all the party assembled at the breakfast
given by Albert de Morcerf; and although Debray was not in
the habit of yielding to such feelings, he had never been able
to shake off the powerful influence excited in his mind by
the impressive look and manner of the count, consequently
the description given by Lucien to the baroness bore the
highly-colored tinge of his own heated imagination. Already
excited by the wonderful stories related of the count by De
Morcerf, it is no wonder that Madame Danglars eagerly
listened to, and fully credited, all the additional
circumstances detailed by Debray. This posing at the piano
and over the album was only a little ruse adopted by way of
precaution. A most gracious welcome and unusual smile
were bestowed on M. Danglars; the count, in return for his
gentlemanly bow, received a formal though graceful
courtesy, while Lucien exchanged with the count a sort of
distant recognition, and with Danglars a free and easy nod.
"Baroness," said Danglars, "give me leave to present to you
the Count of Monte Cristo, who has been most warmly
recommended to me by my correspondents at Rome. I need
but mention one fact to make all the ladies in Paris court his
notice, and that is, that he has come to take up his abode in
Paris for a year, during which brief period he proposes to
198

spend six millions of money. That means balls, dinners, and
lawn parties without end, in all of which I trust the count
will remember us, as he may depend upon it we shall him, in
our own humble entertainments." In spite of the gross
flattery and coarseness of this address, Madame Danglars
could not forbear gazing with considerable interest on a man
capable of expending six millions in twelve months, and
who had selected Paris for the scene of his princely
extravagance. "And when did you arrive here?" inquired she.
"Yesterday morning, madame."
"Coming, as usual, I presume, from the extreme end of the
globe? Pardon me -- at least, such I have heard is your
custom."
"Nay, madame. This time I have merely come from Cadiz."
"You have selected a most unfavorable moment for your first
visit. Paris is a horrible place in summer. Balls, parties, and
fetes are over; the Italian opera is in London; the French
opera everywhere except in Paris. As for the Theatre
Francais, you know, of course, that it is nowhere. The only
amusements left us are the indifferent races at the Champ de
Mars and Satory. Do you propose entering any horses at
either of these races, count?"
"I shall do whatever they do at Paris, madame, if I have the
good fortune to find some one who will initiate me into the
prevalent ideas of amusement."
"Are you fond of horses, count?"
"I have passed a considerable part of my life in the East,
madame, and you are doubtless aware that the Orientals
value only two things -- the fine breeding of their horses and
the beauty of their women."
"Nay, count," said the baroness, "it would have been
somewhat more gallant to have placed the ladies first."
"You see, madame, how rightly I spoke when I said I
required a preceptor to guide me in all my sayings and
doings here." At this instant the favorite attendant of
Madame Danglars entered the boudoir; approaching her
mistress, she spoke some words in an undertone. Madame
Danglars turned very pale, then exclaimed, -- "I cannot
believe it; the thing is impossible."
"I assure you, madame," replied the woman, "it is as I have
said." Turning impatiently towards her husband, Madame
Danglars demanded, "Is this true?"
"Is what true, madame?" inquired Danglars, visibly agitated.
"What my maid tells me."
"But what does she tell you?"
"That when my coachman was about to harness the horses to
my carriage, he discovered that they had been removed from
the stables without his knowledge. I desire to know what is
the meaning of this?"
"Be kind enough, madame, to listen to me," said Danglars.
"Oh, yes; I will listen, monsieur, for I am most curious to
hear what explanation you will give. These two gentlemen
shall decide between us; but, first, I will state the case to
them. Gentlemen," continued the baroness, "among the ten
horses in the stables of Baron Danglars, are two that belong
exclusively to me -- a pair of the handsomest and most

spirited creatures to be found in Paris. But to you, at least, M.
Debray, I need not give a further description, because to you
my beautiful pair of dappled grays were well known. Well, I
had promised Madame de Villefort the loan of my carriage
to drive to-morrow to the Bois; but when my coachman goes
to fetch the grays from the stables they are gone -- positively
gone. No doubt M. Danglars has sacrificed them to the
selfish consideration of gaining some thousands of paltry
francs. Oh, what a detestable crew they are, these mercenary
speculators!"

somewhere about 30,000 francs." Debray conveyed the
count's reply to the baroness. Poor Danglars looked so
crest-fallen and discomfited that Monte Cristo assumed a
pitying air towards him. "See," said the count, "how very
ungrateful women are. Your kind attention, in providing for
the safety of the baroness by disposing of the horses, does
not seem to have made the least impression on her. But so it
is; a woman will often, from mere wilfulness, prefer that
which is dangerous to that which is safe. Therefore, in my
opinion, my dear baron, the best and easiest way is to leave
them to their fancies, and allow them to act as they please,
"Madame," replied Danglars, "the horses were not
and then, if any mischief follows, why, at least, they have no
sufficiently quiet for you; they were scarcely four years old,
one to blame but themselves." Danglars made no reply; he
and they made me extremely uneasy on your account."
was occupied in anticipations of the coming scene between
"Nonsense," retorted the baroness; "you could not have himself and the baroness, whose frowning brow, like that of
entertained any alarm on the subject, because you are Olympic Jove, predicted a storm. Debray, who perceived the
perfectly well aware that I have had for a month in my gathering clouds, and felt no desire to witness the explosion
service the very best coachman in Paris. But, perhaps, you of Madame Danglars' rage, suddenly recollected an
have disposed of the coachman as well as the horses?"
appointment, which compelled him to take his leave; while
"My dear love, pray do not say any more about them, and I Monte Cristo, unwilling by prolonging his stay to destroy
promise you another pair exactly like them in appearance, the advantages he hoped to obtain, made a farewell bow and
only more quiet and steady." The baroness shrugged her departed, leaving Danglars to endure the angry reproaches
shoulders with an air of ineffable contempt, while her of his wife.
husband, affecting not to observe this unconjugal gesture, "Excellent," murmured Monte Cristo to himself, as he came
turned towards Monte Cristo and said, -- "Upon my word, away. "All his gone according to my wishes. The domestic
count, I am quite sorry not to have met you sooner. You are peace of this family is henceforth in my hands. Now, then, to
setting up an establishment, of course?"
play another master-stroke, by which I shall gain the heart of
both husband and wife -- delightful! Still," added he, "amid
"Why, yes," replied the count.
all this, I have not yet been presented to Mademoiselle
"I should have liked to have made you the offer of these Eugenie Danglars, whose acquaintance I should have been
horses. I have almost given them away, as it is; but, as I glad to make. But," he went on with his peculiar smile, "I am
before said, I was anxious to get rid of them upon any terms. here in Paris, and have plenty of time before me -- by and by
They were only fit for a young man."
will do for that." With these reflections he entered his
"I am much obliged by your kind intentions towards me," carriage and returned home. Two hours afterwards,
said Monte Cristo; "but this morning I purchased a very Madame Danglars received a most flattering epistle from the
excellent pair of carriage-horses, and I do not think they count, in which he entreated her to receive back her favorite
were dear. There they are. Come, M. Debray, you are a "dappled grays," protesting that he could not endure the idea
connoisseur, I believe, let me have your opinion upon them." of making his entry into the Parisian world of fashion with
As Debray walked towards the window, Danglars the knowledge that his splendid equipage had been obtained
approached his wife. "I could not tell you before others," said at the price of a lovely woman's regrets. The horses were
he in a low tone, "the reason of my parting with the horses; sent back wearing the same harness she had seen on them in
but a most enormous price was offered me this morning for the morning; only, by the count's orders, in the centre of each
them. Some madman or fool, bent upon ruining himself as rosette that adorned either side of their heads, had been
fast as he can, actually sent his steward to me to purchase fastened a large diamond.
them at any cost; and the fact is, I have gained 16,000 francs To Danglars Monte Cristo also wrote, requesting him to
by the sale of them. Come, don't look so angry, and you shall excuse the whimsical gift of a capricious millionaire, and to
have 4,000 francs of the money to do what you like with, and beg the baroness to pardon the Eastern fashion adopted in
Eugenie shall have 2,000. There, what do you think now of the return of the horses.
the affair? Wasn't I right to part with the horses?" Madame
Danglars surveyed her husband with a look of withering During the evening, Monte Cristo quitted Paris for Auteuil,
accompanied by Ali. The following day, about three o'clock,
contempt.
a single blow struck on the gong summoned Ali to the
"Great heavens?" suddenly exclaimed Debray.
presence of the count. "Ali," observed his master, as the
Nubian entered the chamber, "you have frequently
"What is it?" asked the baroness.
explained to me how more than commonly skilful you are in
"I cannot be mistaken; there are your horses! The very
throwing the lasso, have you not?" Ali drew himself up
animals we were speaking of, harnessed to the count's
proudly, and then returned a sign in the affirmative. "I
carriage!"
thought I did not mistake. With your lasso you could stop an
"My dappled grays?" demanded the baroness, springing to ox?" Again Ali repeated his affirmative gesture. "Or a tiger?"
the window. "'Tis indeed they!" said she. Danglars looked Ali bowed his head in token of assent. "A lion even?" Ali
absolutely stupefied. "How very singular," cried Monte sprung forwards, imitating the action of one throwing the
Cristo with well-feigned astonishment.
lasso, then of a strangled lion.
"I cannot believe it," murmured the banker. Madame
Danglars whispered a few words in the ear of Debray, who
approached Monte Cristo, saying, "The baroness wishes to
know what you paid her husband for the horses."
"I scarcely know," replied the count; "it was a little surprise
prepared for me by my steward, and cost me -- well,

"I understand," said Monte Cristo; "you wish to tell me you
have hunted the lion?" Ali smiled with triumphant pride as
he signified that he had indeed both chased and captured
many lions. "But do you believe you could arrest the
progress of two horses rushing forwards with ungovernable
fury?" The Nubian smiled. "It is well," said Monte Cristo.
"Then listen to me. Ere long a carriage will dash past here,
199


CHAPTER 47


THE DAPPLED GRAYS

drawn by the pair of dappled gray horses you saw me with
yesterday; now, at the risk of your own life, you must
manage to stop those horses before my door."
Ali descended to the street, and marked a straight line on the
pavement immediately at the entrance of the house, and
then pointed out the line he had traced to the count, who
was watching him. The count patted him gently on the
shoulder, his usual mode of praising Ali, who, pleased and
gratified with the commission assigned him, walked calmly
towards a projecting stone forming the angle of the street
and house, and, seating himself thereon, began to smoke his
chibouque, while Monte Cristo re-entered his dwelling,
perfectly assured of the success of his plan. Still, as five
o'clock approached, and the carriage was momentarily
expected by the count, the indication of more than common
impatience and uneasiness might be observed in his manner.
He stationed himself in a room commanding a view of the
street, pacing the chamber with restless steps, stopping
merely to listen from time to time for the sound of
approaching wheels, then to cast an anxious glance on Ali;
but the regularity with which the Nubian puffed forth the
smoke of his chibouque proved that he at least was wholly
absorbed in the enjoyment of his favorite occupation.
Suddenly a distant sound of rapidly advancing wheels was
heard, and almost immediately a carriage appeared, drawn
by a pair of wild, ungovernable horses, while the terrified
coachman strove in vain to restrain their furious speed.
In the vehicle was a young woman and a child of about
seven or eight clasped in each other's arms. Terror seemed to
have deprived them even of the power of uttering a cry. The
carriage creaked and rattled as it flew over the rough stones,
and the slightest obstacle under the wheels would have
caused disaster; but it kept on in the middle of the road, and
those who saw it pass uttered cries of terror.
Ali suddenly cast aside his chibouque, drew the lasso from
his pocket, threw it so skilfully as to catch the forelegs of the
near horse in its triple fold, and suffered himself to be
dragged on for a few steps by the violence of the shock, then
the animal fell over on the pole, which snapped, and
therefore prevented the other horse from pursuing its way.
Gladly availing himself of this opportunity, the coachman
leaped from his box; but Ali had promptly seized the nostrils
of the second horse, and held them in his iron grasp, till the
beast, snorting with pain, sunk beside his companion. All
this was achieved in much less time than is occupied in the
recital. The brief space had, however, been sufficient for a
man, followed by a number of servants, to rush from the
house before which the accident had occurred, and, as the
coachman opened the door of the carriage, to take from it a
lady who was convulsively grasping the cushions with one
hand, while with the other she pressed to her bosom the
young boy, who had lost consciousness.

my whole fortune shall not be thought too much for the
recovery of my boy."
With a calm smile and a gentle wave of the hand, Monte
Cristo signed to the distracted mother to lay aside her
apprehensions; then, opening a casket that stood near, he
drew forth a phial of Bohemian glass incrusted with gold,
containing a liquid of the color of blood, of which he let fall a
single drop on the child's lips. Scarcely had it reached them,
ere the boy, though still pale as marble, opened his eyes, and
eagerly gazed around him. At this, the delight of the mother
was almost frantic. "Where am I?" exclaimed she; "and to
whom am I indebted for so happy a termination to my late
dreadful alarm?"
"Madame," answered the count, "you are under the roof of
one who esteems himself most fortunate in having been able
to save you from a further continuance of your sufferings."
"My wretched curiosity has brought all this about," pursued
the lady. "All Paris rung with the praises of Madame
Danglars' beautiful horses, and I had the folly to desire to
know whether they really merited the high praise given to
them."
"Is it possible," exclaimed the count with well-feigned
astonishment, "that these horses belong to the baroness?"
"They do, indeed. May I inquire if you are acquainted with
Madame Danglars?"
"I have that honor; and my happiness at your escape from
the danger that threatened you is redoubled by the
consciousness that I have been the unwilling and the
unintentional cause of all the peril you have incurred. I
yesterday purchased these horses of the baron; but as the
baroness evidently regretted parting with them, I ventured
to send them back to her, with a request that she would
gratify me by accepting them from my hands."
"You are, then, doubtless, the Count of Monte Cristo, of
whom Hermine has talked to me so much?"
"You have rightly guessed, madame," replied the count.
"And I am Madame Heloise de Villefort." The count bowed
with the air of a person who hears a name for the first time.
"How grateful will M. de Villefort be for all your goodness;
how thankfully will he acknowledge that to you alone he
owes the existence of his wife and child! Most certainly, but
for the prompt assistance of your intrepid servant, this dear
child and myself must both have perished."
"Indeed, I still shudder at the fearful danger you were placed
in."
"I trust you will allow me to recompense worthily the
devotion of your man."

"I beseech you, madame," replied Monte Cristo "not to spoil
Ali, either by too great praise or rewards. I cannot allow him
Monte Cristo carried them both to the salon, and deposited to acquire the habit of expecting to be recompensed for every
them on a sofa. "Compose yourself, madame," said he; "all trifling service he may render. Ali is my slave, and in saving
danger is over." The woman looked up at these words, and, your life he was but discharging his duty to me."
with a glance far more expressive than any entreaties could
have been, pointed to her child, who still continued "Nay," interposed Madame de Villefort, on whom the
insensible. "I understand the nature of your alarms, authoritative style adopted by the count made a deep
madame," said the count, carefully examining the child, "but impression, "nay, but consider that to preserve my life he has
I assure you there is not the slightest occasion for uneasiness; risked his own."
your little charge has not received the least injury; his
insensibility is merely the effects of terror, and will soon
pass."
"Are you quite sure you do not say so to tranquillize my
fears? See how deadly pale he is! My child, my darling
Edward; speak to your mother -- open your dear eyes and
look on me once again! Oh, sir, in pity send for a physician;
200

"His life, madame, belongs not to him; it is mine, in return
for my having myself saved him from death." Madame de
Villefort made no further reply; her mind was utterly
absorbed in the contemplation of the person who, from the
first instant she saw him, had made so powerful an
impression on her. During the evident preoccupation of
Madame de Villefort, Monte Cristo scrutinized the features
and appearance of the boy she kept folded in her arms,

lavishing on him the most tender endearments. The child
was small for his age, and unnaturally pale. A mass of
straight black hair, defying all attempts to train or curl it, fell
over his projecting forehead, and hung down to his
shoulders, giving increased vivacity to eyes already
sparkling with a youthful love of mischief and fondness for
every forbidden enjoyment. His mouth was large, and the
lips, which had not yet regained their color, were
particularly thin; in fact, the deep and crafty look, giving a
predominant expression to the child's face, belonged rather
to a boy of twelve or fourteen than to one so young. His first
movement was to free himself by a violent push from the
encircling arms of his mother, and to rush forward to the
casket from whence the count had taken the phial of elixir;
then, without asking permission of any one, he proceeded, in
all the wilfulness of a spoiled child unaccustomed to restrain
either whims or caprices, to pull the corks out of all the
bottles.
"Touch nothing, my little friend," cried the count eagerly;
"some of those liquids are not only dangerous to taste, but
even to inhale."
Madame de Villefort became very pale, and, seizing her
son's arm, drew him anxiously toward her; but, once
satisfied of his safety, she also cast a brief but expressive
glance on the casket, which was not lost upon the count. At
this moment Ali entered. At sight of him Madame de
Villefort uttered an expression of pleasure, and, holding the
child still closer towards her, she said, "Edward, dearest, do
you see that good man? He has shown very great courage
and resolution, for he exposed his own life to stop the horses
that were running away with us, and would certainly have
dashed the carriage to pieces. Thank him, then, my child, in
your very best manner; for, had he not come to our aid,
neither you nor I would have been alive to speak our
thanks." The child stuck out his lips and turned away his
head in a disdainful manner, saying, "He's too ugly."
The count smiled as if the child bade fair to realize his hopes,
while Madame de Villefort reprimanded her son with a
gentleness and moderation very far from conveying the least
idea of a fault having been committed. "This lady," said the
Count, speaking to Ali in the Arabic language, "is desirous
that her son should thank you for saving both their lives; but
the boy refuses, saying you are too ugly." Ali turned his
intelligent countenance towards the boy, on whom he gazed
without any apparent emotion; but the spasmodic working
of the nostrils showed to the practiced eye of Monte Cristo
that the Arab had been wounded to the heart.
"Will you permit me to inquire," said Madame de Villefort,
as she arose to take her leave, "whether you usually reside
here?"
"No, I do not," replied Monte Cristo; "it is a small place I
have purchased quite lately. My place of abode is No. 30,
Avenue des Champs Elysees; but I see you have quite
recovered from your fright, and are, no doubt, desirous of
returning home. Anticipating your wishes, I have desired the
same horses you came with to be put to one of my carriages,
and Ali, he whom you think so very ugly," continued he,
addressing the boy with a smiling air, "will have the honor
of driving you home, while your coachman remains here to
attend to the necessary repairs of your calash. As soon as
that important business is concluded, I will have a pair of
my own horses harnessed to convey it direct to Madame
Danglars."
"I dare not return with those dreadful horses," said Madame
de Villefort.
"You will see," replied Monte Cristo, "that they will be as

different as possible in the hands of Ali. With him they will
be gentle and docile as lambs." Ali had, indeed, given proof
of this; for, approaching the animals, who had been got upon
their legs with considerable difficulty, he rubbed their
foreheads and nostrils with a sponge soaked in aromatic
vinegar, and wiped off the sweat and foam that covered
their mouths. Then, commencing a loud whistling noise, he
rubbed them well all over their bodies for several minutes;
then, undisturbed by the noisy crowd collected round the
broken carriage, Ali quietly harnessed the pacified animals
to the count's chariot, took the reins in his hands, and
mounted the box, when to the utter astonishment of those
who had witnessed the ungovernable spirit and maddened
speed of the same horses, he was actually compelled to
apply his whip in no very gentle manner before he could
induce them to start; and even then all that could be
obtained from the celebrated "dappled grays," now changed
into a couple of dull, sluggish, stupid brutes, was a slow,
pottering pace, kept up with so much difficulty that Madame
de Villefort was more than two hours returning to her
residence in the Faubourg St. Honore.
Scarcely had the first congratulations upon her marvellous
escape been gone through when she wrote the following
letter to Madame Danglars: -Dear Hermine, -- I have just had a wonderful escape from
the most imminent danger, and I owe my safety to the very
Count of Monte Cristo we were talking about yesterday, but
whom I little expected to see to-day. I remember how
unmercifully I laughed at what I considered your eulogistic
and exaggerated praises of him; but I have now ample cause
to admit that your enthusiastic description of this wonderful
man fell far short of his merits. Your horses got as far as
Ranelagh, when they darted forward like mad things, and
galloped away at so fearful a rate, that there seemed no other
prospect for myself and my poor Edward but that of being
dashed to pieces against the first object that impeded their
progress, when a strange-looking man, -- an Arab, a negro,
or a Nubian, at least a black of some nation or other -- at a
signal from the count, whose domestic he is, suddenly seized
and stopped the infuriated animals, even at the risk of being
trampled to death himself; and certainly he must have had a
most wonderful escape. The count then hastened to us, and
took us into his house, where he speedily recalled my poor
Edward to life. He sent us home in his own carriage. Yours
will be returned to you to-morrow. You will find your horses
in bad condition, from the results of this accident; they seem
thoroughly stupefied, as if sulky and vexed at having been
conquered by man. The count, however, his commissioned
me to assure you that two or three days' rest, with plenty of
barley for their sole food during that time, will bring them
back to as fine, that is as terrifying, a condition as they were
in yesterday. Adieu! I cannot return you many thanks for the
drive of yesterday; but, after all, I ought not to blame you for
the misconduct of your horses, more especially as it
procured me the pleasure of an introduction to the Count of
Monte Cristo, -- and certainly that illustrious personage,
apart from the millions he is said to be so very anxious to
dispose of, seemed to me one of those curiously interesting
problems I, for one, delight in solving at any risk, even if it
were to necessitate another drive to the Bois behind your
horses. Edward endured the accident with miraculous
courage -- he did not utter a single cry, but fell lifeless into
my arms; nor did a tear fall from his eyes after it was over. I
doubt not you will consider these praises the result of blind
maternal affection, but there is a soul of iron in that delicate,
fragile body. Valentine sends many affectionate
remembrances to your dear Eugenie. I embrace you with all
my heart.
201


CHAPTER 47


THE DAPPLED GRAYS

Heloise de Villefort.
P.S. -- Do pray contrive some means for me to meet the
Count of Monte Cristo at your house. I must and will see
him again. I have just made M. de Villefort promise to call
on him, and I hope the visit will be returned.
That night the adventure at Auteuil was talked of
everywhere. Albert related it to his mother; Chateau-Renaud
recounted it at the Jockey Club, and Debray detailed it at
length in the salons of the minister; even Beauchamp
accorded twenty lines in his journal to the relation of the
count's courage and gallantry, thereby celebrating him as the

202

greatest hero of the day in the eyes of all the feminine
members of the aristocracy. Vast was the crowd of visitors
and inquiring friends who left their names at the residence
of Madame de Villefort, with the design of renewing their
visit at the right moment, of hearing from her lips all the
interesting circumstances of this most romantic adventure.
As for M. de Villefort, he fulfilled the predictions of Heloise
to the letter, -- donned his dress suit, drew on a pair of white
gloves, ordered the servants to attend the carriage dressed in
their full livery, and drove that same night to No. 30 in the
Avenue des Champs-Elysees.


Chapter 48

I

f the Count of Monte Cristo had been for a long time
familiar with the ways of Parisian society, he would have
appreciated better the significance of the step which M. de
Villefort had taken. Standing well at court, whether the king
regnant was of the older or younger branch, whether the
government was doctrinaire liberal, or conservative; looked
upon by all as a man of talent, since those who have never
experienced a political check are generally so regarded;
hated by many, but warmly supported by others, without
being really liked by anybody, M. de Villefort held a high
position in the magistracy, and maintained his eminence like
a Harlay or a Mole. His drawing-room, under the
regenerating influence of a young wife and a daughter by his
first marriage, scarcely eighteen, was still one of the
well-regulated Paris salons where the worship of traditional
customs and the observance of rigid etiquette were carefully
maintained. A freezing politeness, a strict fidelity to
government principles, a profound contempt for theories
and theorists, a deep-seated hatred of ideality, -- these were
the elements of private and public life displayed by M. de
Villefort.

Ideology
whose carriage had just now stopped before the Count of
Monte Cristo's door. The valet de chambre announced M. de
Villefort at the moment when the count, leaning over a large
table, was tracing on a map the route from St. Petersburg to
China.

The procureur entered with the same grave and measured
step he would have employed in entering a court of justice.
He was the same man, or rather the development of the
same man, whom we have heretofore seen as assistant
attorney at Marseilles. Nature, according to her way, had
made no deviation in the path he had marked out for himself.
From being slender he had now become meagre; once pale,
he was now yellow; his deep-set eyes were hollow, and the
gold spectacles shielding his eyes seemed to be an integral
portion of his face. He dressed entirely in black, with the
exception of his white tie, and his funeral appearance was
only mitigated by the slight line of red ribbon which passed
almost imperceptibly through his button-hole, and appeared
like a streak of blood traced with a delicate brush. Although
master of himself, Monte Cristo, scrutinized with
irrepressible curiosity the magistrate whose salute he
He was not only a magistrate, he was almost a diplomatist. returned, and who, distrustful by habit, and especially
His relations with the former court, of which he always incredulous as to social prodigies, was much more dispised
spoke with dignity and respect, made him respected by the to look upon "the noble stranger," as Monte Cristo was
new one, and he knew so many things, that not only was he already called, as an adventurer in search of new fields, or
always carefully considered, but sometimes consulted. an escaped criminal, rather than as a prince of the Holy See,
Perhaps this would not have been so had it been possible to or a sultan of the Thousand and One Nights.
get rid of M. de Villefort; but, like the feudal barons who
"Sir," said Villefort, in the squeaky tone assumed by
rebelled against their sovereign, he dwelt in an impregnable
magistrates in their oratorical periods, and of which they
fortress. This fortress was his post as king's attorney, all the
cannot, or will not, divest themselves in society, "sir, the
advantages of which he exploited with marvellous skill, and
signal service which you yesterday rendered to my wife and
which he would not have resigned but to be made deputy,
son has made it a duty for me to offer you my thanks. I have
and thus to replace neutrality by opposition. Ordinarily M.
come, therefore, to discharge this duty, and to express to you
de Villefort made and returned very few visits. His wife
my overwhelming gratitude." And as he said this, the "eye
visited for him, and this was the received thing in the world,
severe" of the magistrate had lost nothing of its habitual
where the weighty and multifarious occupations of the
arrogance. He spoke in a voice of the procureur-general,
magistrate were accepted as an excuse for what was really
with the rigid inflexibility of neck and shoulders which
only calculated pride, a manifestation of professed
caused his flatterers to say (as we have before observed) that
superiority -- in fact, the application of the axiom, "Pretend
he was the living statue of the law.
to think well of yourself, and the world will think well of
you," an axiom a hundred times more useful in society "Monsieur," replied the count, with a chilling air, "I am very
nowadays than that of the Greeks, "Know thyself," a happy to have been the means of preserving a son to his
knowledge for which, in our days, we have substituted the mother, for they say that the sentiment of maternity is the
less difficult and more advantageous science of knowing most holy of all; and the good fortune which occurred to me,
monsieur, might have enabled you to dispense with a duty
others.
which, in its discharge, confers an undoubtedly great honor;
To his friends M. de Villefort was a powerful protector; to
for I am aware that M. de Villefort is not usually lavish of the
his enemies, he was a silent, but bitter opponent; for those
favor which he now bestows on me, -- a favor which,
who were neither the one nor the other, he was a statue of
however estimable, is unequal to the satisfaction which I
the law-made man. He had a haughty bearing, a look either
have in my own consciousness." Villefort, astonished at this
steady and impenetrable or insolently piercing and
reply, which he by no means expected, started like a soldier
inquisitorial. Four successive revolutions had built and
who feels the blow levelled at him over the armor he wears,
cemented the pedestal upon which his fortune was based. M.
and a curl of his disdainful lip indicated that from that
de Villefort had the reputation of being the least curious and
moment he noted in the tablets of his brain that the Count of
the least wearisome man in France. He gave a ball every year,
Monte Cristo was by no means a highly bred gentleman. He
at which he appeared for a quarter of an hour only, -- that is
glanced around. in order to seize on something on which the
to say, five and forty minutes less than the king is visible at
conversation might turn, and seemed to fall easily on a topic.
his balls. He was never seen at the theatres, at concerts, or in
He saw the map which Monte Cristo had been examining
any place of public resort. Occasionally, but seldom, he
when he entered, and said, "You seem geographically
played at whist, and then care was taken to select partners
engaged, sir? It is a rich study for you, who, as I learn, have
worthy of him -- sometimes they were ambassadors,
seen as many lands as are delineated on this map."
sometimes archbishops, or sometimes a prince, or a
president, or some dowager duchess. Such was the man "Yes, sir," replied the count; "l have sought to make of the
203


CHAPTER 48

human race, taken in the mass, what you practice every day
on individuals -- a physiological study. I have believed it
was much easier to descend from the whole to a part than to
ascend from a part to the whole. It is an algebraic axiom,
which makes us proceed from a known to an unknown
quantity, and not from an unknown to a known; but sit
down, sir, I beg of you."
Monte Cristo pointed to a chair, which the procureur was
obliged to take the trouble to move forwards himself, while
the count merely fell back into his own, on which he had
been kneeling when M. Villefort entered. Thus the count was
halfway turned towards his visitor, having his back towards
the window, his elbow resting on the geographical chart
which furnished the theme of conversation for the moment,
-- a conversation which assumed, as in the case of the
interviews with Danglars and Morcerf, a turn analogous to
the persons, if not to the situation. "Ah, you philosophize,"
replied Villefort, after a moment's silence, during which, like
a wrestler who encounters a powerful opponent, he took
breath; "well, sir, really, if, like you, I had nothing else to do,
I should seek a more amusing occupation."

IDEOLOGY
but that relatively to all I have learned, you have yet a great
deal to learn."
"But with what motive have you learned all this?" inquired
Villefort, in astonishment. Monte Cristo smiled. "Really, sir,"
he observed, "I see that in spite of the reputation which you
have acquired as a superior man, you look at everything
from the material and vulgar view of society, beginning with
man, and ending with man -- that is to say, in the most
restricted, most narrow view which it is possible for human
understanding to embrace."
"Pray, sir, explain yourself," said Villefort, more and more
astonished, "I really do -- not -- understand you -- perfectly."

"I say, sir, that with the eyes fixed on the social organization
of nations, you see only the springs of the machine, and lose
sight of the sublime workman who makes them act; I say
that you do not recognize before you and around you any
but those office-holders whose commissions have been
signed by a minister or king; and that the men whom God
has put above those office-holders, ministers, and kings, by
giving them a mission to follow out, instead of a post to fill -I say that they escape your narrow, limited field of
"Why, in truth, sir," was Monte Cristo's reply, "man is but an
observation. It is thus that human weakness fails, from its
ugly caterpillar for him who studies him through a solar
debilitated and imperfect organs. Tobias took the angel who
microscope; but you said, I think, that I had nothing else to
restored him to light for an ordinary young man. The nations
do. Now, really, let me ask, sir, have you? -- do you believe
took Attila, who was doomed to destroy them, for a
you have anything to do? or to speak in plain terms, do you
conqueror similar to other conquerors, and it was necessary
really think that what you do deserves being called
for both to reveal their missions, that they might be known
anything?"
and acknowledged; one was compelled to say, `I am the
Villefort's astonishment redoubled at this second thrust so angel of the Lord'; and the other, `I am the hammer of God,'
forcibly made by his strange adversary. It was a long time in order that the divine essence in both might be revealed."
since the magistrate had heard a paradox so strong, or rather,
"Then," said Villefort, more and more amazed, and really
to say the truth more exactly, it was the first time he had
supposing he was speaking to a mystic or a madman, "you
ever heard of it. The procureur exerted himself to reply.
consider yourself as one of those extraordinary beings whom
"Sir," he responded, "you are a stranger, and I believe you
you have mentioned?"
say yourself that a portion of your life has been spent in
Oriental countries, so you are not aware how human justice, "And why not?" said Monte Cristo coldly.
so expeditions in barbarous countries, takes with us a "Your pardon, sir," replied Villefort, quite astounded, "but
prudent and well-studied course."
you will excuse me if, when I presented myself to you, I was
"Oh, yes -- yes, I do, sir; it is the pede claudo of the ancients. I
know all that, for it is with the justice of all countries
especially that I have occupied myself -- it is with the
criminal procedure of all nations that I have compared
natural justice, and I must say, sir, that it is the law of
primitive nations, that is, the law of retaliation, that I have
most frequently found to be according to the law of God."
"If this law were adopted, sir," said the procureur, "it would
greatly simplify our legal codes, and in that case the
magistrates would not (as you just observed) have much to
do."
"It may, perhaps, come to this in time," observed Monte
Cristo; "you know that human inventions march from the
complex to the simple, and simplicity is always perfection."
"In the meanwhile," continued the magistrate, "our codes are
in full force, with all their contradictory enactments derived
from Gallic customs, Roman laws, and Frank usages; the
knowledge of all which, you will agree, is not to be acquired
without extended labor; it needs tedious study to acquire
this knowledge, and, when acquired, a strong power of brain
to retain it."
"I agree with you entirely, sir; but all that even you know
with respect to the French code, I know, not only in reference
to that code, but as regards the codes of all nations. The
English, Turkish, Japanese, Hindu laws, are as familiar to me
as the French laws, and thus I was right, when I said to you,
that relatively (you know that everything is relative, sir) -that relatively to what I have done, you have very little to do;
204

unaware that I should meet with a person whose knowledge
and understanding so far surpass the usual knowledge and
understanding of men. It is not usual with us corrupted
wretches of civilization to find gentlemen like yourself,
possessors, as you are, of immense fortune -- at least, so it is
said -- and I beg you to observe that I do not inquire, I
merely repeat; -- it is not usual, I say, for such privileged and
wealthy beings to waste their time in speculations on the
state of society, in philosophical reveries, intended at best to
console those whom fate has disinherited from the goods of
this world."
"Really, sir," retorted the count, "have you attained the
eminent situation in which you are, without having
admitted, or even without having met with exceptions? and
do you never use your eyes, which must have acquired so
much finesse and certainty, to divine, at a glance, the kind of
man by whom you are confronted? Should not a magistrate
be not merely the best administrator of the law, but the most
crafty expounder of the chicanery of his profession, a steel
probe to search hearts, a touchstone to try the gold which in
each soul is mingled with more or less of alloy?"
"Sir," said Villefort, "upon my word, you overcome me. I
really never heard a person speak as you do."
"Because you remain eternally encircled in a round of
general conditions, and have never dared to raise your
wings into those upper spheres which God has peopled with
invisible or exceptional beings."
"And you allow then, sir, that spheres exist, and that these

marked and invisible beings mingle amongst us?"
"Why should they not? Can you see the air you breathe, and
yet without which you could not for a moment exist?"
"Then we do not see those beings to whom you allude?"
"Yes, we do; you see them whenever God pleases to allow
them to assume a material form. You touch them, come in
contact with them, speak to them, and they reply to you."
"Ah," said Villefort, smiling, "I confess I should like to be
warned when one of these beings is in contact with me."
"You have been served as you desire, monsieur, for you were
warned just now, and I now again warn you."
"Then you yourself are one of these marked beings?"
"Yes, monsieur, I believe so; for until now, no man has found
himself in a position similar to mine. The dominions of kings
are limited either by mountains or rivers, or a change of
manners, or an alteration of language. My kingdom is
bounded only by the world, for I am not an Italian, or a
Frenchman, or a Hindu, or an American, or a Spaniard -- I
am a cosmopolite. No country can say it saw my birth. God
alone knows what country will see me die. I adopt all
customs, speak all languages. You believe me to be a
Frenchman, for I speak French with the same facility and
purity as yourself. Well, Ali, my Nubian, believes me to be
an Arab; Bertuccio, my steward, takes me for a Roman;
Haidee, my slave, thinks me a Greek. You may, therefore,
comprehend, that being of no country, asking no protection
from any government, acknowledging no man as my brother,
not one of the scruples that arrest the powerful, or the
obstacles which paralyze the weak, paralyzes or arrests me. I
have only two adversaries -- I will not say two conquerors,
for with perseverance I subdue even them, -- they are time
and distance. There is a third, and the most terrible -- that is
my condition as a mortal being. This alone can stop me in
my onward career, before I have attained the goal at which I
aim, for all the rest I have reduced to mathematical terms.
What men call the chances of fate -- namely, ruin, change,
circumstances -- I have fully anticipated, and if any of these
should overtake me, yet it will not overwhelm me. Unless I
die, I shall always be what I am, and therefore it is that I
utter the things you have never heard, even from the mouths
of kings -- for kings have need, and other persons have fear
of you. For who is there who does not say to himself, in a
society as incongruously organized as ours, `Perhaps some
day I shall have to do with the king's attorney'?"
"But can you not say that, sir? The moment you become an
inhabitant of France, you are naturally subjected to the
French law."
"I know it sir," replied Monte Cristo; "but when I visit a
country I begin to study, by all the means which are
available, the men from whom I may have anything to hope
or to fear, till I know them as well as, perhaps better than,
they know themselves. It follows from this, that the king's
attorney, be he who he may, with whom I should have to
deal, would assuredly be more embarrassed than I should."

that's all. But let us leave off this strain, sir, if the tone of it is
displeasing to you; I am no more disturbed by your justice
than are you by my second-sight."
"No, no, -- by no means," said Villefort, who was afraid of
seeming to abandon his ground. "No; by your brilliant and
almost sublime conversation you have elevated me above
the ordinary level; we no longer talk, we rise to dissertation.
But you know how the theologians in their collegiate chairs,
and philosophers in their controversies, occasionally say
cruel truths; let us suppose for the moment that we are
theologizing in a social way, or even philosophically, and I
will say to you, rude as it may seem, `My brother, you
sacrifice greatly to pride; you may be above others, but
above you there is God.'"
"Above us all, sir," was Monte Cristo's response, in a tone
and with an emphasis so deep that Villefort involuntarily
shuddered. "I have my pride for men -- serpents always
ready to threaten every one who would pass without
crushing them under foot. But I lay aside that pride before
God, who has taken me from nothing to make me what I
am."
"Then, count, I admire you," said Villefort, who, for the first
time in this strange conversation, used the aristocratic form
to the unknown personage, whom, until now, he had only
called monsieur. "Yes, and I say to you, if you are really
strong, really superior, really pious, or impenetrable, which
you were right in saying amounts to the same thing -- then
be proud, sir, for that is the characteristic of predominance.
Yet you have unquestionably some ambition."
"I have, sir."
"And what may it be?"
"I too, as happens to every man once in his life, have been
taken by Satan into the highest mountain in the earth, and
when there he showed me all the kingdoms of the world,
and as he said before, so said he to me, `Child of earth, what
wouldst thou have to make thee adore me?' I reflected long,
for a gnawing ambition had long preyed upon me, and then
I replied, `Listen, -- I have always heard of providence, and
yet I have never seen him, or anything that resembles him, or
which can make me believe that he exists. I wish to be
providence myself, for I feel that the most beautiful, noblest,
most sublime thing in the world, is to recompense and
punish.' Satan bowed his head, and groaned. `You mistake,'
he said, `providence does exist, only you have never seen
him, because the child of God is as invisible as the parent.
You have seen nothing that resembles him, because he
works by secret springs, and moves by hidden ways. All I
can do for you is to make you one of the agents of that
providence.' The bargain was concluded. I may sacrifice my
soul, but what matters it?" added Monte Cristo. "If the thing
were to do again, I would again do it." Villefort looked at
Monte Cristo with extreme amazement. "Count," he inquired,
"have you any relations?"
"No, sir, I am alone in the world."

"So much the worse."
"That is to say," replied Villefort with hesitation, "that human
"Why?" asked Monte Cristo.
nature being weak, every man, according to your creed, has
committed faults."
"Because then you might witness a spectacle calculated to
break down your pride. You say you fear nothing but
"Faults or crimes," responded Monte Cristo with a negligent
death?"
air.
"I did not say that I feared it; I only said that death alone
"And that you alone, amongst the men whom you do not
could check the execution of my plans."
recognize as your brothers -- for you have said so," observed
Villefort in a tone that faltered somewhat -- "you alone are "And old age?"
perfect."
"My end will be achieved before I grow old."
"No, not perfect," was the count's reply; "only impenetrable,
205


CHAPTER 48

"And madness?"
"I have been nearly mad; and you know the axiom, -- non bis
in idem. It is an axiom of criminal law, and, consequently,
you understand its full application."
"Sir," continued Villefort, "there is something to fear besides
death, old age, and madness. For instance, there is apoplexy
-- that lightning-stroke which strikes but does not destroy
you, and yet which brings everything to an end. You are still
yourself as now, and yet you are yourself no longer; you
who, like Ariel, verge on the angelic, are but an inert mass,
which, like Caliban, verges on the brutal; and this is called in
human tongues, as I tell you, neither more nor less than
apoplexy. Come, if so you will, count, and continue this
conversation at my house, any day you may be willing to see
an adversary capable of understanding and anxious to refute
you, and I will show you my father, M. Noirtier de Villefort,
one of the most fiery Jacobins of the French Revolution; that
is to say, he had the most remarkable audacity, seconded by
a most powerful organization -- a man who has not, perhaps,
like yourself seen all the kingdoms of the earth, but who has
helped to overturn one of the greatest; in fact, a man who
believed himself, like you, one of the envoys, not of God, but
of a supreme being; not of providence, but of fate. Well, sir,
the rupture of a blood-vessel on the lobe of the brain has
destroyed all this, not in a day, not in an hour, but in a
second. M. Noirtier, who, on the previous night, was the old
Jacobin, the old senator, the old Carbonaro, laughing at the
guillotine, the cannon, and the dagger -- M. Noirtier, playing
with revolutions -- M. Noirtier, for whom France was a vast
chess-board, from which pawns, rooks, knights, and queens
were to disappear, so that the king was checkmated -- M.
Noirtier, the redoubtable, was the next morning `poor M.
Noirtier,' the helpless old man, at the tender mercies of the
weakest creature in the household, that is, his grandchild,
Valentine; a dumb and frozen carcass, in fact, living
painlessly on, that time may be given for his frame to
decompose without his consciousness of its decay."
"Alas, sir," said Monte Cristo "this spectacle is neither
strange to my eye nor my thought. I am something of a
physician, and have, like my fellows, sought more than once

206

IDEOLOGY
for the soul in living and in dead matter; yet, like providence,
it has remained invisible to my eyes, although present to my
heart. A hundred writers since Socrates, Seneca, St.
Augustine, and Gall, have made, in verse and prose, the
comparison you have made, and yet I can well understand
that a father's sufferings may effect great changes in the
mind of a son. I will call on you, sir, since you bid me
contemplate, for the advantage of my pride, this terrible
spectacle, which must have been so great a source of sorrow
to your family."
"It would have been so unquestionably, had not God given
me so large a compensation. In contrast with the old man,
who is dragging his way to the tomb, are two children just
entering into life -- Valentine, the daughter by my first wife
-- Mademoiselle Renee de Saint-Meran -- and Edward, the
boy whose life you have this day saved."
"And what is your deduction from this compensation, sir?"
inquired Monte Cristo.
"My deduction is," replied Villefort, "that my father, led
away by his passions, has committed some fault unknown to
human justice, but marked by the justice of God. That God,
desirous in his mercy to punish but one person, has visited
this justice on him alone." Monte Cristo with a smile on his
lips, uttered in the depths of his soul a groan which would
have made Villefort fly had he but heard it. "Adieu, sir," said
the magistrate, who had risen from his seat; "I leave you,
bearing a remembrance of you -- a remembrance of esteem,
which I hope will not be disagreeable to you when you know
me better; for I am not a man to bore my friends, as you will
learn. Besides, you have made an eternal friend of Madame
de Villefort." The count bowed, and contented himself with
seeing Villefort to the door of his cabinet, the procureur
being escorted to his carriage by two footmen, who, on a
signal from their master, followed him with every mark of
attention. When he had gone, Monte Cristo breathed a
profound sigh, and said, -- "Enough of this poison, let me
now seek the antidote." Then sounding his bell, he said to Ali,
who entered, "I am going to madam's chamber -- have the
carriage ready at one o'clock."


Chapter 49

Haidee

I

t will be recollected that the new, or rather old,
acquaintances of the Count of Monte Cristo, residing in the
Rue Meslay, were no other than Maximilian, Julie, and
Emmanuel. The very anticipations of delight to be enjoyed in
his forthcoming visits -- the bright, pure gleam of heavenly
happiness it diffused over the almost deadly warfare in
which he had voluntarily engaged, illumined his whole
countenance with a look of ineffable joy and calmness, as,
immediately after Villefort's departure, his thoughts flew
back to the cheering prospect before him, of tasting, at least,
a brief respite from the fierce and stormy passions of his
mind. Even Ali, who had hastened to obey the Count's
summons, went forth from his master's presence in charmed
amazement at the unusual animation and pleasure depicted
on features ordinarily so stern and cold; while, as though
dreading to put to flight the agreeable ideas hovering over
his patron's meditations, whatever they were, the faithful
Nubian walked on tiptoe towards the door, holding his
breath, lest its faintest sound should dissipate his master's
happy reverie.

undeceived by their movements as they constantly shifted in
and out of a pair of little slippers with upturned toes,
beautifully ornamented with gold and pearls. She wore a
blue and white-striped vest, with long open sleeves,
trimmed with silver loops and buttons of pearls, and a sort
of bodice, which, closing only from the centre to the waist,
exhibited the whole of the ivory throat and upper part of the
bosom; it was fastened with three magnificent diamond
clasps. The junction of the bodice and drawers was entirely
concealed by one of the many-colored scarfs, whose brilliant
hues and rich silken fringe have rendered them so precious
in the eyes of Parisian belles. Tilted on one side of her head
she had a small cap of gold-colored silk, embroidered with
pearls; while on the other a purple rose mingled its glowing
colors with the luxuriant masses of her hair, of which the
blackness was so intense that it was tinged with blue. The
extreme beauty of the countenance, that shone forth in
loveliness that mocked the vain attempts of dress to
augment it, was peculiarly and purely Grecian; there were
the large, dark, melting eyes, the finely formed nose, the
coral lips, and pearly teeth, that belonged to her race and
It was noon, and Monte Cristo had set apart one hour to be
country. And, to complete the whole, Haidee was in the very
passed in the apartments of Haidee, as though his oppressed
springtide and fulness of youthful charms -- she had not yet
spirit could not all at once admit the feeling of pure and
numbered more than twenty summers.
unmixed joy, but required a gradual succession of calm and
gentle emotions to prepare his mind to receive full and Monte Cristo summoned the Greek attendant, and bade her
perfect happiness, in the same manner as ordinary natures inquire whether it would be agreeable to her mistress to
demand to be inured by degrees to the reception of strong or receive his visit. Haidee's only reply was to direct her
violent sensations. The young Greek, as we have already servant by a sign to withdraw the tapestried curtain that
said, occupied apartments wholly unconnected with those of hung before the door of her boudoir, the framework of the
the count. The rooms had been fitted up in strict accordance opening thus made serving as a sort of border to the graceful
with Oriental ideas; the floors were covered with the richest tableau presented by the young girl's picturesque attitude
carpets Turkey could produce; the walls hung with brocaded and appearance. As Monte Cristo approached, she leaned
silk of the most magnificent designs and texture; while upon the elbow of the arm that held the narghile, and
around each chamber luxurious divans were placed, with extending to him her other hand, said, with a smile of
piles of soft and yielding cushions, that needed only to be captivating sweetness, in the sonorous language spoken by
arranged at the pleasure or convenience of such as sought the women of Athens and Sparta, "Why demand permission
repose. Haidee and three French maids, and one who was a ere you enter? Are you no longer my master, or have I
Greek. The first three remained constantly in a small ceased to be your slave?" Monte Cristo returned her smile.
waiting-room, ready to obey the summons of a small golden "Haidee," said he, "you well know."
bell, or to receive the orders of the Romaic slave, who knew
"Why do you address me so coldly -- so distantly?" asked the
just enough French to be able to transmit her mistress's
young Greek. "Have I by any means displeased you? Oh, if
wishes to the three other waiting-women; the latter had
so, punish me as you will; but do not -- do not speak to me in
received most peremptory instructions from Monte Cristo to
tones and manner so formal and constrained."
treat Haidee with all the deference they would observe to a
"Haidee," replied the count, "you know that you are now in
queen.
France, and are free."
The young girl herself generally passed her time in the
chamber at the farther end of her apartments. This was a sort "Free to do what?" asked the young girl.
of boudoir, circular, and lighted only from the roof, which "Free to leave me."
consisted of rose-colored glass. Haidee was reclining upon
soft downy cushions, covered with blue satin spotted with "Leave you? Why should I leave you?"
silver; her head, supported by one of her exquisitely "That is not for me to say; but we are now about to mix in
moulded arms, rested on the divan immediately behind her, society -- to visit and be visited."
while the other was employed in adjusting to her lips the
"I don't wish to see anybody but you."
coral tube of a rich narghile, through whose flexible pipe she
drew the smoke fragrant by its passage through perfumed "And should you see one whom you could prefer, I would
water. Her attitude, though perfectly natural for an Eastern not be so unjust" -woman would, in a European, have been deemed too full of "I have never seen any one I preferred to you, and I have
coquettish straining after effect. Her dress, which was that of never loved any one but you and my father."
the women of Epirus, consisted of a pair of white satin
trousers, embroidered with pink roses, displaying feet so "My poor child," replied Monte Cristo, "that is merely
exquisitely formed and so delicately fair, that they might because your father and myself are the only men who have
well have been taken for Parian marble, had not the eye been ever talked to you."
207


CHAPTER 49

"I don't want anybody else to talk to me. My father said I
was his `joy' -- you style me your `love,' -- and both of you
have called me `my child.'"
"Do you remember your father, Haidee?" The young Greek
smiled. "He is here, and here," said she, touching her eyes
and her heart. "And where am I?" inquired Monte Cristo
laughingly.
"You?" cried she, with tones of thrilling tenderness, "you are
everywhere!" Monte Cristo took the delicate hand of the
young girl in his, and was about to raise it to his lips, when
the simple child of nature hastily withdrew it, and presented
her cheek. "You now understand, Haidee," said the count,
"that from this moment you are absolutely free; that here you
exercise unlimited sway, and are at liberty to lay aside or
continue the costume of your country, as it may suit your
inclination. Within this mansion you are absolute mistress of
your actions, and may go abroad or remain in your
apartments as may seem most agreeable to you. A carriage
waits your orders, and Ali and Myrtho will accompany you
whithersoever you desire to go. There is but one favor I
would entreat of you."
"Speak."
"Guard carefully the secret of your birth. Make no allusion to
the past; nor upon any occasion be induced to pronounce the
names of your illustrious father or ill-fated mother."
"I have already told you, my lord, that I shall see no one."
"It is possible, Haidee, that so perfect a seclusion, though
conformable with the habits and customs of the East, may
not be practicable in Paris. Endeavor, then, to accustom
yourself to our manner of living in these northern climes as
you did to those of Rome, Florence, Milan, and Madrid; it
may be useful to you one of these days, whether you remain
here or return to the East." The young girl raised her tearful
eyes towards Monte Cristo as she said with touching
earnestness, "Whether we return to the East, you mean to say,
my lord, do you not?"
"My child," returned Monte Cristo "you know full well that
whenever we part, it will be no fault or wish of mine; the
tree forsakes not the flower -- the flower falls from the tree."
"My lord," replied Haidee, "I never will leave you, for I am

208

HAIDEE

sure I could not exist without you."
"My poor girl, in ten years I shall be old, and you will be still
young."
"My father had a long white beard, but I loved him; he was
sixty years old, but to me he was handsomer than all the fine
youths I saw."
"Then tell me, Haidee, do you believe you shall be able to
accustom yourself to our present mode of life?"
"Shall I see you?"
"Every day."
"Then what do you fear, my lord?"
"You might find it dull."
"No, my lord. In the morning, I shall rejoice in the prospect
of your coming, and in the evening dwell with delight on the
happiness I have enjoyed in your presence; then too, when
alone, I can call forth mighty pictures of the past, see vast
horizons bounded only by the towering mountains of
Pindus and Olympus. Oh, believe me, that when three great
passions, such as sorrow, love, and gratitude fill the heart,
ennui can find no place."
"You are a worthy daughter of Epirus, Haidee, and your
charming and poetical ideas prove well your descent from
that race of goddesses who claim your country as their
birthplace. Depend on my care to see that your youth is not
blighted, or suffered to pass away in ungenial solitude; and
of this be well assured, that if you love me as a father, I love
you as a child."
"You are wrong, my lord. The love I have for you is very
different from the love I had for my father. My father died,
but I did not die. If you were to die, I should die too." The
Count, with a smile of profound tenderness, extended his
hand, and she carried it to her lips. Monte Cristo, thus
attuned to the interview he proposed to hold with Morrel
and his family, departed, murmuring as he went these lines
of Pindar, "Youth is a flower of which love is the fruit; happy
is he who, after having watched its silent growth, is
permitted to gather and call it his own." The carriage was
prepared according to orders, and stepping lightly into it,
the count drove off at his usual rapid pace.


Chapter 50

The Morrel Family

I

n a very few minutes the count reached No. 7 in the Rue
Meslay. The house was of white stone, and in a small
court before it were two small beds full of beautiful flowers.
In the concierge that opened the gate the count recognized
Cocles; but as he had but one eye, and that eye had become
somewhat dim in the course of nine years, Cocles did not
recognize the count. The carriages that drove up to the door
were compelled to turn, to avoid a fountain that played in a
basin of rockwork, -- an ornament that had excited the
jealousy of the whole quarter, and had gained for the place
the appellation of "The Little Versailles." It is needless to add
that there were gold and silver fish in the basin. The house,
with kitchens and cellars below, had above the ground-floor,
two stories and attics. The whole of the property, consisting
of an immense workshop, two pavilions at the bottom of the
garden, and the garden itself, had been purchased by
Emmanuel, who had seen at a glance that he could make of
it a profitable speculation. He had reserved the house and
half the garden, and building a wall between the garden and
the workshops, had let them upon lease with the pavilions at
the bottom of the garden. So that for a trifling sum he was as
well lodged, and as perfectly shut out from observation, as
the inhabitants of the finest mansion in the Faubourg St.
Germain. The breakfast-room was finished in oak; the salon
in mahogany, and the furnishings were of blue velvet; the
bedroom was in citronwood and green damask. There was a
study for Emmanuel, who never studied, and a music-room
for Julie, who never played. The whole of the second story
was set apart for Maximilian; it was precisely similar to his
sister's apartments, except that for the breakfast-parlor he
had a billiard-room, where he received his friends. He was
superintending the grooming of his horse, and smoking his
cigar at the entrance of the garden, when the count's carriage
stopped at the gate.
Cocles opened the gate, and Baptistin, springing from the
box, inquired whether Monsieur and Madame Herbault and
Monsieur Maximilian Morrel would see his excellency the
Count of Monte Cristo. "The Count of Monte Cristo?" cried
Morrel, throwing away his cigar and hastening to the
carriage; "I should think we would see him. Ah, a thousand
thanks, count, for not having forgotten your promise." And
the young officer shook the count's hand so warmly, that
Monte Cristo could not be mistaken as to the sincerity of his
joy, and he saw that he had been expected with impatience,
and was received with pleasure. "Come, come," said
Maximilian, "I will serve as your guide; such a man as you
are ought not to be introduced by a servant. My sister is in
the garden plucking the dead roses; my brother is reading
his two papers, the Presse and the Debats, within six steps of
her; for wherever you see Madame Herbault, you have only
to look within a circle of four yards and you will find M.
Emmanuel, and `reciprocally,' as they say at the Polytechnic
School." At the sound of their steps a young woman of
twenty to five and twenty, dressed in a silk morning gown,
and busily engaged in plucking the dead leaves off a noisette
rose-tree, raised her head. This was Julie, who had become,
as the clerk of the house of Thomson & French had predicted,
Madame Emmanuel Herbault. She uttered a cry of surprise
at the sight of a stranger, and Maximilian began to laugh.
"Don't disturb yourself, Julie," said he. "The count has only
been two or three days in Paris, but he already knows what a
fashionable woman of the Marais is, and if he does not, you

will show him."
"Ah, monsieur," returned Julie, "it is treason in my brother to
bring you thus, but he never has any regard for his poor
sister. Penelon, Penelon!" An old man, who was digging
busily at one of the beds, stuck his spade in the earth, and
approached, cap in hand, striving to conceal a quid of
tobacco he had just thrust into his cheek. A few locks of gray
mingled with his hair, which was still thick and matted,
while his bronzed features and determined glance well
suited an old sailor who had braved the heat of the equator
and the storms of the tropics. "I think you hailed me,
Mademoiselle Julie?" said he. Penelon had still preserved the
habit of calling his master's daughter "Mademoiselle Julie,"
and had never been able to change the name to Madame
Herbault. "Penelon," replied Julie, "go and inform M.
Emmanuel of this gentleman's visit, and Maximilian will
conduct him to the salon." Then, turning to Monte Cristo, -"I hope you will permit me to leave you for a few minutes,"
continued she; and without awaiting any reply, disappeared
behind a clump of trees, and escaped to the house by a
lateral alley.
"I am sorry to see," observed Monte Cristo to Morrel, "that I
cause no small disturbance in your house."
"Look there," said Maximilian, laughing; "there is her
husband changing his jacket for a coat. I assure you, you are
well known in the Rue Meslay."
"Your family appears to be a very happy one," said the count,
as if speaking to himself.
"Oh, yes, I assure you, count, they want nothing that can
render them happy; they are young and cheerful, they are
tenderly attached to each other, and with twenty-five
thousand francs a year they fancy themselves as rich as
Rothschild."
"Five and twenty thousand francs is not a large sum,
however," replied Monte Cristo, with a tone so sweet and
gentle, that it went to Maximilian's heart like the voice of a
father; "but they will not be content with that. Your
brother-in-law is a barrister? a doctor?"
"He was a merchant, monsieur, and had succeeded to the
business of my poor father. M. Morrel, at his death, left
500,000 francs, which were divided between my sister and
myself, for we were his only children. Her husband, who,
when he married her, had no other patrimony than his noble
probity, his first-rate ability, and his spotless reputation,
wished to possess as much as his wife. He labored and toiled
until he had amassed 250,000 francs; six years sufficed to
achieve this object. Oh, I assure you, sir, it was a touching
spectacle to see these young creatures, destined by their
talents for higher stations, toiling together, and through their
unwillingness to change any of the customs of their paternal
house, taking six years to accomplish what less scrupulous
people would have effected in two or three. Marseilles
resounded with their well-earned praises. At last, one day,
Emmanuel came to his wife, who had just finished making
up the accounts. `Julie,' said he to her, `Cocles has just given
me the last rouleau of a hundred francs; that completes the
250,000 francs we had fixed as the limits of our gains. Can
you content yourself with the small fortune which we shall
possess for the future? Listen to me. Our house transacts
business to the amount of a million a year, from which we
209


CHAPTER 50


THE MORREL FAMILY

derive an income of 40,000 francs. We can dispose of the
business, if we please, in an hour, for I have received a letter
from M. Delaunay, in which he offers to purchase the
good-will of the house, to unite with his own, for 300,000
francs. Advise me what I had better do.' -- `Emmanuel,'
returned my sister, `the house of Morrel can only be carried
on by a Morrel. Is it not worth 300,000 francs to save our
father's name from the chances of evil fortune and failure?' -`I thought so,' replied Emmanuel; `but I wished to have your
advice.' -- `This is my counsel: -- Our accounts are made up
and our bills paid; all we have to do is to stop the issue of
any more, and close our office.' This was done instantly. It
was three o'clock; at a quarter past, a merchant presented
himself to insure two ships; it was a clear profit of 15,000
francs. `Monsieur,' said Emmanuel, `have the goodness to
address yourself to M. Delaunay. We have quitted business.'
-- `How long?' inquired the astonished merchant. `A quarter
of an hour,' was the reply. And this is the reason, monsieur,"
continued Maximilian, "of my sister and brother-in-law
having only 25,000 francs a year."

few frail planks can alone realize the blessings of fair
weather."

"We are very happy, monsieur," replied Julie; "but we have
also known unhappiness, and few have ever undergone
more bitter sufferings than ourselves." The Count's features
displayed an expression of the most intense curiosity.

delight. It was the letter written (as our readers know) to
Julie, and signed "Sinbad the Sailor." "Unknown you say, is
the man who rendered you this service -- unknown to you?"

Monte Cristo rose, and without making any answer (for the
tremulousness of his voice would have betrayed his emotion)
walked up and down the apartment with a slow step.
"Our magnificence makes you smile, count," said Maximilian,
who had followed him with his eyes. "No, no," returned
Monte Cristo, pale as death, pressing one hand on his heart
to still its throbbings, while with the other he pointed to a
crystal cover, beneath which a silken purse lay on a black
velvet cushion. "I was wondering what could be the
significance of this purse, with the paper at one end and the
large diamond at the other."
"Count," replied Maximilian, with an air of gravity, "those
are our most precious family treasures."
"The stone seems very brilliant," answered the count.

"Oh, my brother does not allude to its value, although it has
been estimated at 100,000 francs; he means, that the articles
Maximilian had scarcely finished his story, during which the contained in this purse are the relics of the angel I spoke of
count's heart had swelled within him, when Emmanuel just now."
entered wearing a hat and coat. He saluted the count with "This I do not comprehend; and yet I may not ask for an
the air of a man who is aware of the rank of his guest; then, explanation, madame," replied Monte Cristo bowing.
after having led Monte Cristo around the little garden, he "Pardon me, I had no intention of committing an
returned to the house. A large vase of Japan porcelain, filled indiscretion."
with flowers that loaded the air with their perfume, stood in
"Indiscretion, -- oh, you make us happy by giving us an
the salon. Julie, suitably dressed, and her hair arranged (she
excuse for expatiating on this subject. If we wanted to
had accomplished this feat in less than ten minutes),
conceal the noble action this purse commemorates, we
received the count on his entrance. The songs of the birds
should not expose it thus to view. Oh, would we could relate
were heard in an aviary hard by, and the branches of
it everywhere, and to every one, so that the emotion of our
laburnums and rose acacias formed an exquisite framework
unknown benefactor might reveal his presence."
to the blue velvet curtains. Everything in this charming
retreat, from the warble of the birds to the smile of the "Ah, really," said Monte Cristo in a half-stifled voice.
mistress, breathed tranquillity and repose. The count had felt "Monsieur," returned Maximilian, raising the glass cover,
the influence of this happiness from the moment he entered and respectfully kissing the silken purse, "this has touched
the house, and he remained silent and pensive, forgetting the hand of a man who saved my father from suicide, us
that he was expected to renew the conversation, which had from ruin, and our name from shame and disgrace, -- a man
ceased after the first salutations had been exchanged. The by whose matchless benevolence we poor children, doomed
silence became almost painful when, by a violent effort, to want and wretchedness, can at present hear every one
tearing himself from his pleasing reverie -- "Madame," said envying our happy lot. This letter" (as he spoke, Maximilian
he at length, "I pray you to excuse my emotion, which must drew a letter from the purse and gave it to the count) -- "this
astonish you who are only accustomed to the happiness I letter was written by him the day that my father had taken a
meet here; but contentment is so new a sight to me, that I desperate resolution, and this diamond was given by the
could never be weary of looking at yourself and your generous unknown to my sister as her dowry." Monte Cristo
husband."
opened the letter, and read it with an indescribable feeling of

"Oh, all this is a family history, as Chateau-Renaud told you
the other day," observed Maximilian. "This humble picture
would have but little interest for you, accustomed as you are
to behold the pleasures and the misfortunes of the wealthy
and industrious; but such as we are, we have experienced
bitter sorrows."

"Yes; we have never had the happiness of pressing his hand,"
continued Maximilian. "We have supplicated heaven in vain
to grant us this favor, but the whole affair has had a
mysterious meaning that we cannot comprehend -- we have
been guided by an invisible hand, -- a hand as powerful as
that of an enchanter."

"Oh," cried Julie, "I have not lost all hope of some day kissing
"And God has poured balm into your wounds, as he does that hand, as I now kiss the purse which he has touched.
into those of all who are in affliction?" said Monte Cristo Four years ago, Penelon was at Trieste -- Penelon, count, is
the old sailor you saw in the garden, and who, from
inquiringly.
quartermaster, has become gardener -- Penelon, when he
"Yes, count," returned Julie, "we may indeed say he has, for
was at Trieste, saw on the quay an Englishman, who was on
he has done for us what he grants only to his chosen; he sent
the point of embarking on board a yacht, and he recognized
us one of his angels." The count's cheeks became scarlet, and
him as the person who called on my father the fifth of June,
he coughed, in order to have an excuse for putting his
1829, and who wrote me this letter on the fifth of September.
handkerchief to his mouth. "Those born to wealth, and who
He felt convinced of his identity, but he did not venture to
have the means of gratifying every wish," said Emmanuel,
address him."
"know not what is the real happiness of life, just as those
who have been tossed on the stormy waters of the ocean on a "An Englishman," said Monte Cristo, who grew uneasy at
210

the attention with which Julie looked at him. "An Palermo, and he was then on the point of setting out for the
Englishman you say?"
most remote regions; so that I fear he will never return."
"Yes," replied Maximilian, "an Englishman, who represented
himself as the confidential clerk of the house of Thomson &
French, at Rome. It was this that made me start when you
said the other day, at M. de Morcerf's, that Messrs. Thomson
& French were your bankers. That happened, as I told you,
in 1829. For God's sake, tell me, did you know this
Englishman?"
"But you tell me, also, that the house of Thomson & French
have constantly denied having rendered you this service?"
"Yes."
"Then is it not probable that this Englishman may be some
one who, grateful for a kindness your father had shown him,
and which he himself had forgotten, has taken this method
of requiting the obligation?"
"Everything is possible in this affair, even a miracle."
"What was his name?" asked Monte Cristo.

"Oh, monsieur, this is cruel of you," said Julie, much affected;
and the young lady's eyes swam with tears.
"Madame," replied Monte Cristo gravely, and gazing
earnestly on the two liquid pearls that trickled down Julie's
cheeks, "had Lord Wilmore seen what I now see, he would
become attached to life, for the tears you shed would
reconcile him to mankind;" and he held out his hand to Julie,
who gave him hers, carried away by the look and accent of
the count. "But," continued she, "Lord Wilmore had a family
or friends, he must have known some one, can we not -- "
"Oh, it is useless to inquire," returned the count; "perhaps,
after all, he was not the man you seek for. He was my friend:
he had no secrets from me, and if this had been so he would
have confided in me."
"And he told you nothing?"
"Not a word."

"Nothing that would lead you to suppose?"
"He gave no other name," answered Julie, looking earnestly
at the count, "than that at the end of his letter -- `Sinbad the "Nothing."
Sailor.'"
"And yet you spoke of him at once."
"Which is evidently not his real name, but a fictitious one."
"Ah, in such a case one supposes" -Then, noticing that Julie was struck with the sound of his
"Sister, sister," said Maximilian, coming to the count's aid,
voice, -"monsieur is quite right. Recollect what our excellent father
"Tell me," continued he, "was he not about my height, so often told us, `It was no Englishman that thus saved us.'"
perhaps a little taller, with his chin imprisoned, as it were, in Monte Cristo started. "What did your father tell you, M.
a high cravat; his coat closely buttoned up, and constantly Morrel?" said he eagerly.
taking out his pencil?"
"My father thought that this action had been miraculously
"Oh, do you then know him?" cried Julie, whose eyes performed -- he believed that a benefactor had arisen from
sparkled with joy.
the grave to save us. Oh, it was a touching superstition,
monsieur, and although I did not myself believe it, I would
"No," returned Monte Cristo "I only guessed. I knew a Lord
not for the world have destroyed my father's faith. How
Wilmore, who was constantly doing actions of this kind."
often did he muse over it and pronounce the name of a dear
"Without revealing himself?"
friend -- a friend lost to him forever; and on his death-bed,
"He was an eccentric being, and did not believe in the when the near approach of eternity seemed to have
illumined his mind with supernatural light, this thought,
existence of gratitude."
which had until then been but a doubt, became a conviction,
"Oh, heaven," exclaimed Julie, clasping her hands, "in what and his last words were, `Maximilian, it was Edmond
did he believe, then?"
Dantes!'" At these words the count's paleness, which had for
"He did not credit it at the period which I knew him," said some time been increasing, became alarming; he could not
Monte Cristo, touched to the heart by the accents of Julie's speak; he looked at his watch like a man who has forgotten
voice; "but, perhaps, since then he has had proofs that the hour, said a few hurried words to Madame Herbault,
and pressing the hands of Emmanuel and Maximilian, -gratitude does exist."
"Madame," said he, "I trust you will allow me to visit you
"And do you know this gentleman, monsieur?" inquired
occasionally; I value your friendship, and feel grateful to you
Emmanuel.
for your welcome, for this is the first time for many years
"Oh, if you do know him," cried Julie, "can you tell us where that I have thus yielded to my feelings;" and he hastily
he is -- where we can find him? Maximilian -- Emmanuel -- if quitted the apartment.
we do but discover him, he must believe in the gratitude of
"This Count of Monte Cristo is a strange man," said
the heart!" Monte Cristo felt tears start into his eyes, and he
Emmanuel.
again walked hastily up and down the room.
"Yes," answered Maximilian, "but I feel sure he has an
"In the name of heaven," said Maximilian, "if you know
excellent heart, and that he likes us."
anything of him, tell us what it is."
"His voice went to my heart," observed Julie; "and two or
"Alas," cried Monte Cristo, striving to repress his emotion, "if
three times I fancied that I had heard it before."
Lord Wilmore was your unknown benefactor, I fear you will
never see him again. I parted from him two years ago at

211


CHAPTER 51


Chapter 51

A

PYRAMUS AND THISBE

Pyramus And Thisbe

bout two-thirds of the way along the Faubourg
Saint-Honore, and in the rear of one of the most
imposing mansions in this rich neighborhood, where the
various houses vie with each other for elegance of design
and magnificence of construction, extended a large garden,
where the wide-spreading chestnut-trees raised their heads
high above the walls in a solid rampart, and with the coming
of every spring scattered a shower of delicate pink and white
blossoms into the large stone vases that stood upon the two
square pilasters of a curiously wrought iron gate, that dated
from the time of Louis XII. This noble entrance, however, in
spite of its striking appearance and the graceful effect of the
geraniums planted in the two vases, as they waved their
variegated leaves in the wind and charmed the eye with
their scarlet bloom, had fallen into utter disuse. The
proprietors of the mansion had many years before thought it
best to confine themselves to the possession of the house
itself, with its thickly planted court-yard, opening into the
Faubourg Saint-Honore, and to the garden shut in by this
gate, which formerly communicated with a fine
kitchen-garden of about an acre. For the demon of
speculation drew a line, or in other words projected a street,
at the farther side of the kitchen-garden. The street was laid
out, a name was chosen and posted up on an iron plate, but
before construction was begun, it occurred to the possessor
of the property that a handsome sum might be obtained for
the ground then devoted to fruits and vegetables, by
building along the line of the proposed street, and so making
it a branch of communication with the Faubourg
Saint-Honore itself, one of the most important thoroughfares
in the city of Paris.

general estimation as to return not even the one-half per cent
it had originally paid. Towards the house the chestnut-trees
we have before mentioned rose high above the wall, without
in any way affecting the growth of other luxuriant shrubs
and flowers that eagerly dressed forward to fill up the
vacant spaces, as though asserting their right to enjoy the
boon of light and air. At one corner, where the foliage
became so thick as almost to shut out day, a large stone
bench and sundry rustic seats indicated that this sheltered
spot was either in general favor or particular use by some
inhabitant of the house, which was faintly discernible
through the dense mass of verdure that partially concealed it,
though situated but a hundred paces off.

Whoever had selected this retired portion of the grounds as
the boundary of a walk, or as a place for meditation, was
abundantly justified in the choice by the absence of all glare,
the cool, refreshing shade, the screen it afforded from the
scorching rays of the sun, that found no entrance there even
during the burning days of hottest summer, the incessant
and melodious warbling of birds, and the entire removal
from either the noise of the street or the bustle of the
mansion. On the evening of one of the warmest days spring
had yet bestowed on the inhabitants of Paris, might be seen
negligently thrown upon the stone bench, a book, a parasol,
and a work-basket, from which hung a partly embroidered
cambric handkerchief, while at a little distance from these
articles was a young woman, standing close to the iron gate,
endeavoring to discern something on the other side by
means of the openings in the planks, -- the earnestness of her
attitude and the fixed gaze with which she seemed to seek
the object of her wishes, proving how much her feelings
In matters of speculation, however, though "man proposes," were interested in the matter. At that instant the little
"money disposes." From some such difficulty the newly side-gate leading from the waste ground to the street was
named street died almost in birth, and the purchaser of the noiselessly opened, and a tall, powerful young man
kitchen-garden, having paid a high price for it, and being appeared. He was dressed in a common gray blouse and
quite unable to find any one willing to take his bargain off velvet cap, but his carefully arranged hair, beard and
his hands without a considerable loss, yet still clinging to the mustache, all of the richest and glossiest black, ill accorded
belief that at some future day he should obtain a sum for it with his plebeian attire. After casting a rapid glance around
that would repay him, not only for his past outlay, but also him, in order to assure himself that he was unobserved, he
the interest upon the capital locked up in his new acquisition, entered by the small gate, and, carefully closing and securing
contented himself with letting the ground temporarily to it after him, proceeded with a hurried step towards the
some market-gardeners, at a yearly rental of 500 francs. And barrier.
so, as we have said, the iron gate leading into the
At the sight of him she expected, though probably not in
kitchen-garden had been closed up and left to the rust,
such a costume, the young woman started in terror, and was
which bade fair before long to eat off its hinges, while to
about to make a hasty retreat. But the eye of love had
prevent the ignoble glances of the diggers and delvers of the
already seen, even through the narrow chinks of the wooden
ground from presuming to sully the aristocratic enclosure
palisades, the movement of the white robe, and observed the
belonging to the mansion, the gate had been boarded up to a
fluttering of the blue sash. Pressing his lips close to the
height of six feet. True, the planks were not so closely
planks, he exclaimed, "Don't be alarmed, Valentine -- it is I!"
adjusted but that a hasty peep might be obtained through
Again the timid girl found courage to return to the gate,
their interstices; but the strict decorum and rigid propriety of
saying, as she did so, "And why do you come so late to-day?
the inhabitants of the house left no grounds for
It is almost dinner-time, and I had to use no little diplomacy
apprehending that advantage would be taken of that
to get rid of my watchful mother-in-law, my too-devoted
circumstance.
maid, and my troublesome brother, who is always teasing
Horticulture seemed, however, to have been abandoned in me about coming to work at my embroidery, which I am in a
the deserted kitchen-garden; and where cabbages, carrots, fair way never to get done. So pray excuse yourself as well as
radishes, pease, and melons had once flourished, a scanty you can for having made me wait, and, after that, tell me
crop of lucerne alone bore evidence of its being deemed why I see you in a dress so singular that at first I did not
worthy of cultivation. A small, low door gave egress from recognize you."
the walled space we have been describing into the projected
"Dearest Valentine," said the young man, "the difference
street, the ground having been abandoned as unproductive
between our respective stations makes me fear to offend you
by its various renters, and had now fallen so completely in
by speaking of my love, but yet I cannot find myself in your
212

presence without longing to pour forth my soul, and tell you
how fondly I adore you. If it be but to carry away with me
the recollection of such sweet moments, I could even thank
you for chiding me, for it leaves me a gleam of hope, that if
you did not expect me (and that indeed would be worse than
vanity to suppose), at least I was in your thoughts. You
asked me the cause of my being late, and why I come
disguised. I will candidly explain the reason of both, and I
trust to your goodness to pardon me. I have chosen a trade."
"A trade? Oh, Maximilian, how can you jest at a time when
we have such deep cause for uneasiness?"
"Heaven keep me from jesting with that which is far dearer
to me than life itself! But listen to me, Valentine, and I will
tell you all about it. I became weary of ranging fields and
scaling walls, and seriously alarmed at the idea suggested by
you, that if caught hovering about here your father would
very likely have me sent to prison as a thief. That would
compromise the honor of the French army, to say nothing of
the fact that the continual presence of a captain of Spahis in a
place where no warlike projects could be supposed to
account for it might well create surprise; so I have become a
gardener, and, consequently, adopted the costume of my
calling."

no other reward than the pleasure of being useful to you;
and have I ever since, by word or look, given you cause of
regret for having selected me from the numbers that would
willingly have sacrificed their lives for you? You told me, my
dear Valentine, that you were engaged to M. d'Epinay, and
that your father was resolved upon completing the match,
and that from his will there was no appeal, as M. de Villefort
was never known to change a determination once formed. I
kept in the background, as you wished, and waited, not for
the decision of your heart or my own, but hoping that
providence would graciously interpose in our behalf, and
order events in our favor. But what cared I for delays or
difficulties, Valentine, as long as you confessed that you
loved me, and took pity on me? If you will only repeat that
avowal now and then, I can endure anything."
"Ah, Maximilian, that is the very thing that makes you so
bold, and which renders me at once so happy and unhappy,
that I frequently ask myself whether it is better for me to
endure the harshness of my mother-in-law, and her blind
preference for her own child, or to be, as I now am,
insensible to any pleasure save such as I find in these
meetings, so fraught with danger to both."

"I will not admit that word," returned the young man; "it is
at once cruel and unjust. Is it possible to find a more
submissive slave than myself? You have permitted me to
"Nonsense? Pray do not call what I consider the wisest converse with you from time to time, Valentine, but
action of my life by such a name. Consider, by becoming a forbidden my ever following you in your walks or elsewhere
gardener I effectually screen our meetings from all suspicion -- have I not obeyed? And since I found means to enter this
or danger."
enclosure to exchange a few words with you through this
"I beseech of you, Maximilian, to cease trifling, and tell me gate -- to be close to you without really seeing you -- have I
ever asked so much as to touch the hem of your gown or
what you really mean."
tried to pass this barrier which is but a trifle to one of my
"Simply, that having ascertained that the piece of ground on youth and strength? Never has a complaint or a murmur
which I stand was to let, I made application for it, was escaped me. I have been bound by my promises as rigidly as
readily accepted by the proprietor, and am now master of any knight of olden times. Come, come, dearest Valentine,
this fine crop of lucerne. Think of that, Valentine! There is confess that what I say is true, lest I be tempted to call you
nothing now to prevent my building myself a little hut on unjust."
my plantation, and residing not twenty yards from you.
Only imagine what happiness that would afford me. I can "It is true," said Valentine, as she passed the end of her
scarcely contain myself at the bare idea. Such felicity seems slender fingers through a small opening in the planks, and
above all price -- as a thing impossible and unattainable. But permitted Maximilian to press his lips to them, "and you are
would you believe that I purchase all this delight, joy, and a true and faithful friend; but still you acted from motives of
happiness, for which I would cheerfully have surrendered self-interest, my dear Maximilian, for you well knew that
ten years of my life, at the small cost of 500 francs per annum, from the moment in which you had manifested an opposite
paid quarterly? Henceforth we have nothing to fear. I am on spirit all would have been ended between us. You promised
my own ground, and have an undoubted right to place a to bestow on me the friendly affection of a brother. For I
ladder against the wall, and to look over when I please, have no friend but yourself upon earth, who am neglected
without having any apprehensions of being taken off by the and forgotten by my father, harassed and persecuted by my
police as a suspicious character. I may also enjoy the mother-in-law, and left to the sole companionship of a
precious privilege of assuring you of my fond, faithful, and paralyzed and speechless old man, whose withered hand
unalterable affection, whenever you visit your favorite can no longer press mine, and who can speak to me with the
bower, unless, indeed, it offends your pride to listen to eye alone, although there still lingers in his heart the
professions of love from the lips of a poor workingman, clad warmest tenderness for his poor grandchild. Oh, how bitter
in a blouse and cap." A faint cry of mingled pleasure and a fate is mine, to serve either as a victim or an enemy to all
surprise escaped from the lips of Valentine, who almost who are stronger than myself, while my only friend and
instantly said, in a saddened tone, as though some envious supporter is a living corpse! Indeed, indeed, Maximilian, I
cloud darkened the joy which illumined her heart, "Alas, no, am very miserable, and if you love me it must be out of
Maximilian, this must not be, for many reasons. We should pity."
"What excessive nonsense you talk, Maximilian!"

presume too much on our own strength, and, like others, "Valentine," replied the young man, deeply affected, "I will
perhaps, be led astray by our blind confidence in each other's not say you are all I love in the world, for I dearly prize my
prudence."
sister and brother-in-law; but my affection for them is calm
"How can you for an instant entertain so unworthy a and tranquil, in no manner resembling what I feel for you.
thought, dear Valentine? Have I not, from the first blessed When I think of you my heart beats fast, the blood burns in
hour of our acquaintance, schooled all my words and actions my veins, and I can hardly breathe; but I solemnly promise
to your sentiments and ideas? And you have, I am sure, the you to restrain all this ardor, this fervor and intensity of
fullest confidence in my honor. When you spoke to me of feeling, until you yourself shall require me to render them
experiencing a vague and indefinite sense of coming danger, available in serving or assisting you. M. Franz is not
I placed myself blindly and devotedly at your service, asking expected to return home for a year to come, I am told; in that
time many favorable and unforeseen chances may befriend
213


CHAPTER 51


PYRAMUS AND THISBE

us. Let us, then, hope for the best; hope is so sweet a
comforter. Meanwhile, Valentine, while reproaching me
with selfishness, think a little what you have been to me -the beautiful but cold resemblance of a marble Venus. What
promise of future reward have you made me for all the
submission and obedience I have evinced? -- none whatever.
What granted me? -- scarcely more. You tell me of M. Franz
d'Epinay, your betrothed lover, and you shrink from the idea
of being his wife; but tell me, Valentine, is there no other
sorrow in your heart? You see me devoted to you, body and
soul, my life and each warm drop that circles round my
heart are consecrated to your service; you know full well that
my existence is bound up in yours -- that were I to lose you I
would not outlive the hour of such crushing misery; yet you
speak with calmness of the prospect of your being the wife
of another! Oh, Valentine, were I in your place, and did I feel
conscious, as you do, of being worshipped, adored, with
such a love as mine, a hundred times at least should I have
passed my hand between these iron bars, and said, `Take
this hand, dearest Maximilian, and believe that, living or
dead, I am yours -- yours only, and forever!'" The poor girl
made no reply, but her lover could plainly hear her sobs and
tears. A rapid change took place in the young man's feelings.
"Dearest, dearest Valentine," exclaimed he, "forgive me if I
have offended you, and forget the words I spoke if they have
unwittingly caused you pain."
"No, Maximilian, I am not offended," answered she, "but do
you not see what a poor, helpless being I am, almost a
stranger and an outcast in my father's house, where even he
is seldom seen; whose will has been thwarted, and spirits
broken, from the age of ten years, beneath the iron rod so
sternly held over me; oppressed, mortified, and persecuted,
day by day, hour by hour, minute by minute, no person has
cared for, even observed my sufferings, nor have I ever
breathed one word on the subject save to yourself.
Outwardly and in the eyes of the world, I am surrounded by
kindness and affection; but the reverse is the case. The
general remark is, `Oh, it cannot be expected that one of so
stern a character as M. Villefort could lavish the tenderness
some fathers do on their daughters. What though she has
lost her own mother at a tender age, she has had the
happiness to find a second mother in Madame de Villefort.'
The world, however, is mistaken; my father abandons me
from utter indifference, while my mother-in-law detests me
with a hatred so much the more terrible because it is veiled
beneath a continual smile."
"Hate you, sweet Valentine," exclaimed the young man;
"how is it possible for any one to do that?"

"I seem to myself as though living a life of bondage, yet at
the same time am so conscious of my own weakness that I
fear to break the restraint in which I am held, lest I fall
utterly helpless. Then, too, my father is not a person whose
orders may be infringed with impunity; protected as he is by
his high position and firmly established reputation for talent
and unswerving integrity, no one could oppose him; he is
all-powerful even with the king; he would crush you at a
word. Dear Maximilian, believe me when I assure you that if
I do not attempt to resist my father's commands it is more on
your account than my own."
"But why, Valentine, do you persist in anticipating the worst,
-- why picture so gloomy a future?"
"Because I judge it from the past."
"Still, consider that although I may not be, strictly speaking,
what is termed an illustrious match for you, I am, for many
reasons, not altogether so much beneath your alliance. The
days when such distinctions were so nicely weighed and
considered no longer exist in France, and the first families of
the monarchy have intermarried with those of the empire.
The aristocracy of the lance has allied itself with the nobility
of the cannon. Now I belong to this last-named class; and
certainly my prospects of military preferment are most
encouraging as well as certain. My fortune, though small, is
free and unfettered, and the memory of my late father is
respected in our country, Valentine, as that of the most
upright and honorable merchant of the city; I say our
country, because you were born not far from Marseilles."
"Don't speak of Marseilles, I beg of you, Maximilian; that one
word brings back my mother to my recollection -- my angel
mother, who died too soon for myself and all who knew her;
but who, after watching over her child during the brief
period allotted to her in this world, now, I fondly hope,
watches from her home in heaven. Oh, if my mother were
still living, there would be nothing to fear, Maximilian, for I
would tell her that I loved you, and she would protect us."
"I fear, Valentine," replied the lover, "that were she living I
should never have had the happiness of knowing you; you
would then have been too happy to have stooped from your
grandeur to bestow a thought on me."
"Now it is you who are unjust, Maximilian," cried Valentine;
"but there is one thing I wish to know."
"And what is that?" inquired the young man, perceiving that
Valentine hesitated.

"Tell me truly, Maximilian, whether in former days, when
our fathers dwelt at Marseilles, there was ever any
"Alas," replied the weeping girl, "I am obliged to own that misunderstanding between them?"
my mother-in-law's aversion to me arises from a very
"Not that I am aware of," replied the young man, "unless,
natural source -- her overweening love for her own child, my
indeed, any ill-feeling might have arisen from their being of
brother Edward."
opposite parties -- your father was, as you know, a zealous
"But why should it?"
partisan of the Bourbons, while mine was wholly devoted to
"I do not know; but, though unwilling to introduce money the emperor; there could not possibly be any other difference
matters into our present conversation, I will just say this between them. But why do you ask?"
much -- that her extreme dislike to me has its origin there;
and I much fear she envies me the fortune I enjoy in right of
my mother, and which will be more than doubled at the
death of M. and Mme. de Saint-Meran, whose sole heiress I
am. Madame de Villefort has nothing of her own, and hates
me for being so richly endowed. Alas, how gladly would I
exchange the half of this wealth for the happiness of at least
sharing my father's love. God knows, I would prefer
sacrificing the whole, so that it would obtain me a happy
and affectionate home."
"Poor Valentine!"
214

"I will tell you," replied the young girl, "for it is but right you
should know. Well, on the day when your appointment as
an officer of the Legion of honor was announced in the
papers, we were all sitting with my grandfather, M. Noirtier;
M. Danglars was there also -- you recollect M. Danglars, do
you not, Maximilian, the banker, whose horses ran away
with my mother-in-law and little brother, and very nearly
killed them? While the rest of the company were discussing
the approaching marriage of Mademoiselle Danglars, I was
reading the paper to my grandfather; but when I came to the
paragraph about you, although I had done nothing else but
read it over to myself all the morning (you know you had

told me all about it the previous evening), I felt so happy,
and yet so nervous, at the idea of speaking your name aloud,
and before so many people, that I really think I should have
passed it over, but for the fear that my doing so might create
suspicions as to the cause of my silence; so I summoned up
all my courage, and read it as firmly and as steadily as I
could."
"Dear Valentine!"
"Well, would you believe it? directly my father caught the
sound of your name he turned round quite hastily, and, like
a poor silly thing, I was so persuaded that every one must be
as much affected as myself by the utterance of your name,
that I was not surprised to see my father start, and almost
tremble; but I even thought (though that surely must have
been a mistake) that M. Danglars trembled too."

discerning emotion in his paralyzed frame. And I suspected
that the conversation that had been carried on in his
presence (for they always say and do what they like before
the dear old man, without the smallest regard for his feelings)
had made a strong impression on his mind; for, naturally
enough, it must have pained him to hear the emperor he so
devotedly loved and served spoken of in that depreciating
manner."
"The name of M. Noirtier," interposed Maximilian, "is
celebrated throughout Europe; he was a statesman of high
standing, and you may or may not know, Valentine, that he
took a leading part in every Bonapartist conspiracy set on
foot during the restoration of the Bourbons."

"Oh, I have often heard whispers of things that seem to me
most strange -- the father a Bonapartist, the son a Royalist;
what can have been the reason of so singular a difference in
"`Morrel, Morrel,' cried my father, `stop a bit;' then knitting
parties and politics? But to resume my story; I turned
his brows into a deep frown, he added, `surely this cannot be
towards my grandfather, as though to question him as to the
one of the Morrel family who lived at Marseilles, and gave
cause of his emotion; he looked expressively at the
us so much trouble from their violent Bonapartism -- I mean
newspaper I had been reading. `What is the matter, dear
about the year 1815.' -- `Yes,' replied M. Danglars, `I believe
grandfather?' said I, `are you pleased?' He gave me a sign in
he is the son of the old shipowner.'"
the affirmative. `With what my father said just now?' He
"Indeed," answered Maximilian; "and what did your father returned a sign in the negative. `Perhaps you liked what M.
say then, Valentine?"
Danglars said?' Another sign in the negative. `Oh, then, you
were glad to hear that M. Morrel (I didn't dare to say
"Oh, such a dreadful thing, that I don't dare to tell you."
Maximilian) had been made an officer of the Legion of
"Always tell me everything," said Maximilian with a smile.
Honor?' He signified assent; only think of the poor old man's
"`Ah,' continued my father, still frowning, `their idolized being so pleased to think that you, who were a perfect
emperor treated these madmen as they deserved; he called stranger to him, had been made an officer of the Legion of
them `food for powder,' which was precisely all they were Honor! Perhaps it was a mere whim on his part, for he is
good for; and I am delighted to see that the present falling, they say, into second childhood, but I love him for
government have adopted this salutary principle with all its showing so much interest in you."
pristine vigor; if Algiers were good for nothing but to "How singular," murmured Maximilian; "your father hates
furnish the means of carrying so admirable an idea into me, while your grandfather, on the contrary -- What strange
practice, it would be an acquisition well worthy of struggling feelings are aroused by politics."
to obtain. Though it certainly does cost France somewhat
"Hush," cried Valentine, suddenly; "some one is coming!"
dear to assert her rights in that uncivilized country.'"
Maximilian leaped at one bound into his crop of lucerne,
"Brutal politics, I must confess." said Maximilian; "but don't which he began to pull up in the most ruthless way, under
attach any serious importance, dear, to what your father said. the pretext of being occupied in weeding it.
My father was not a bit behind yours in that sort of talk.
`Why,' said he, `does not the emperor, who has devised so "Mademoiselle, mademoiselle!" exclaimed a voice from
many clever and efficient modes of improving the art of war, behind the trees. "Madame is searching for you everywhere;
organize a regiment of lawyers, judges and legal there is a visitor in the drawing-room."
practitioners, sending them in the hottest fire the enemy
could maintain, and using them to save better men?' You see,
my dear, that for picturesque expression and generosity of
spirit there is not much to choose between the language of
either party. But what did M. Danglars say to this outburst
on the part of the procureur?"

"A visitor?" inquired Valentine, much agitated; "who is it?"
"Some grand personage -- a prince I believe they said -- the
Count of Monte Cristo."

"I will come directly," cried Valentine aloud. The name of
Monte Cristo sent an electric shock through the young man
on the other side of the iron gate, to whom Valentine's "I am
"Oh, he laughed, and in that singular manner so peculiar to
coming" was the customary signal of farewell. "Now, then,"
himself -- half-malicious, half-ferocious; he almost
said Maximilian, leaning on the handle of his spade, "I
immediately got up and took his leave; then, for the first
would give a good deal to know how it comes about that the
time, I observed the agitation of my grandfather, and I must
Count of Monte Cristo is acquainted with M. de Villefort."
tell you, Maximilian, that I am the only person capable of

215


CHAPTER 52


Chapter 52

I

t was really the Count of Monte Cristo who had just
arrived at Madame de Villefort's for the purpose of
returning the procureur's visit, and at his name, as may be
easily imagined, the whole house was in confusion. Madame
de Villefort, who was alone in her drawing-room when the
count was announced, desired that her son might be brought
thither instantly to renew his thanks to the count; and
Edward, who heard this great personage talked of for two
whole days, made all possible haste to come to him, not from
obedience to his mother, or out of any feeling of gratitude to
the count, but from sheer curiosity, and that some chance
remark might give him the opportunity for making one of
the impertinent speeches which made his mother say, -- "Oh,
that naughty child! But I can't be severe with him, he is really
so bright."
After the usual civilities, the count inquired after M. de
Villefort. "My husband dines with the chancellor," replied
the young lady; "he has just gone, and I am sure he'll be
exceedingly sorry not to have had the pleasure of seeing you
before he went." Two visitors who were there when the
count arrived, having gazed at him with all their eyes,
retired after that reasonable delay which politeness admits
and curiosity requires. "What is your sister Valentine doing?"
inquired Madame de Villefort of Edward; "tell some one to
bid her come here, that I may have the honor of introducing
her to the count."
"You have a daughter, then, madame?" inquired the count;
"very young, I presume?"
"The daughter of M. de Villefort by his first marriage,"
replied the young wife, "a fine well-grown girl."
"But melancholy," interrupted Master Edward, snatching the
feathers out of the tail of a splendid parroquet that was
screaming on its gilded perch, in order to make a plume for
his hat. Madame de Villefort merely cried, -- "Be still,
Edward!" She then added, -- "This young madcap is,
however, very nearly right, and merely re-echoes what he
has heard me say with pain a hundred times; for
Mademoiselle de Villefort is, in spite of all we can do to
rouse her, of a melancholy disposition and taciturn habit,
which frequently injure the effect of her beauty. But what
detains her? Go, Edward, and see."

TOXICOLOGY

Toxicology
Valentine, whom we have in the rapid march of our
narrative presented to our readers without formally
introducing her, was a tall and graceful girl of nineteen, with
bright chestnut hair, deep blue eyes, and that reposeful air of
quiet distinction which characterized her mother. Her white
and slender fingers, her pearly neck, her cheeks tinted with
varying hues reminded one of the lovely Englishwomen
who have been so poetically compared in their manner to
the gracefulness of a swan. She entered the apartment, and
seeing near her stepmother the stranger of whom she had
already heard so much, saluted him without any girlish
awkwardness, or even lowering her eyes, and with an
elegance that redoubled the count's attention. He rose to
return the salutation. "Mademoiselle de Villefort, my
daughter-in-law," said Madame de Villefort to Monte Cristo,
leaning back on her sofa and motioning towards Valentine
with her hand. "And M. de Monte Cristo, King of China,
Emperor of Cochin-China," said the young imp, looking
slyly towards his sister.
Madame de Villefort at this really did turn pale, and was
very nearly angry with this household plague, who
answered to the name of Edward; but the count, on the
contrary, smiled, and appeared to look at the boy
complacently, which caused the maternal heart to bound
again with joy and enthusiasm.
"But, madame," replied the count, continuing the
conversation, and looking by turns at Madame de Villefort
and Valentine, "have I not already had the honor of meeting
yourself and mademoiselle before? I could not help thinking
so just now; the idea came over my mind, and as
mademoiselle entered the sight of her was an additional ray
of light thrown on a confused remembrance; excuse the
remark."
"I do not think it likely, sir; Mademoiselle de Villefort is not
very fond of society, and we very seldom go out," said the
young lady.

"Then it was not in society that I met with mademoiselle or
yourself, madame, or this charming little merry boy. Besides,
the Parisian world is entirely unknown to me, for, as I
believe I told you, I have been in Paris but very few days. No,
-- but, perhaps, you will permit me to call to mind -- stay!"
The Count placed his hand on his brow as if to collect his
"Because they are looking for her where she is not to be
thoughts. "No -- it was somewhere -- away from here -- it
found."
was -- I do not know -- but it appears that this recollection is
"And where are they looking for her?"
connected with a lovely sky and some religious fete;
mademoiselle was holding flowers in her hand, the
"With grandpapa Noirtier."
interesting boy was chasing a beautiful peacock in a garden,
"And do you think she is not there?"
and you, madame, were under the trellis of some arbor. Pray
"No, no, no, no, no, she is not there," replied Edward, singing come to my aid, madame; do not these circumstances appeal
to your memory?"
his words.
"And where is she, then? If you know, why don't you tell?"
"She is under the big chestnut-tree," replied the spoiled brat,
as he gave, in spite of his mother's commands, live flies to
the parrot, which seemed keenly to relish such fare. Madame
de Villefort stretched out her hand to ring, intending to
direct her waiting-maid to the spot where she would find
Valentine, when the young lady herself entered the
apartment. She appeared much dejected; and any person
who considered her attentively might have observed the
traces of recent tears in her eyes.
216

"No, indeed," replied Madame de Villefort; "and yet it
appears to me, sir, that if I had met you anywhere, the
recollection of you must have been imprinted on my
memory."
"Perhaps the count saw us in Italy," said Valentine timidly.
"Yes, in Italy; it was in Italy most probably," replied Monte
Cristo; "you have travelled then in Italy, mademoiselle?"
"Yes; madame and I were there two years ago. The doctors,
anxious for my lungs, had prescribed the air of Naples. We
went by Bologna, Perugia, and Rome."

"Ah, yes -- true, mademoiselle," exclaimed Monte Cristo as if
this simple explanation was sufficient to revive the
recollection he sought. "It was at Perugia on Corpus Christi
Day, in the garden of the Hotel des Postes, when chance
brought us together; you, Madame de Villefort, and her son;
I now remember having had the honor of meeting you."

the deplorable condition of my husband's father?"

"You, madame, remained under the arbor; do you not
remember, that while you were seated on a stone bench, and
while, as I told you, Mademoiselle de Villefort and your
young son were absent, you conversed for a considerable
time with somebody?"

"The album," said Edward sulkily.

so that I really acquired a reputation as a skilful physician.
We discoursed a long time, madame, on different subjects; of
Perugino, of Raffaelle, of manners, customs, of the famous
aquatofana, of which they had told you, I think you said,
that certain individuals in Perugia had preserved the secret."

"Take it, then, and pray disturb us no longer," said Madame
de Villefort, giving the album to Edward, who then went
towards the door, led by his mother. The count followed her
with his eyes.

"Yes, madame, M. de Villefort spoke of it to me -- a paralysis,
I think."

"Alas, yes; the poor old gentleman is entirely helpless; the
mind alone is still active in this human machine, and that is
faint and flickering, like the light of a lamp about to expire.
"I perfectly well remember Perugia, sir, and the Hotel des
But excuse me, sir, for talking of our domestic misfortunes; I
Postes, and the festival of which you speak," said Madame
interrupted you at the moment when you were telling me
de Villefort, "but in vain do I tax my memory, of whose
that you were a skilful chemist."
treachery I am ashamed, for I really do not recall to mind
"No, madame, I did not say as much as that," replied the
that I ever had the pleasure of seeing you before."
count with a smile; "quite the contrary. I have studied
"It is strange, but neither do I recollect meeting with you,"
chemistry because, having determined to live in eastern
observed Valentine, raising her beautiful eyes to the count.
climates I have been desirous of following the example of
"But I remember it perfectly," interposed the darling King Mithridates."
Edward.
"Mithridates rex Ponticus," said the young scamp, as he tore
"I will assist your memory, madame," continued the count; some beautiful portraits out of a splendid album, "the
"the day had been burning hot; you were waiting for horses, individual who took cream in his cup of poison every
which were delayed in consequence of the festival. morning at breakfast."
Mademoiselle was walking in the shade of the garden, and
"Edward, you naughty boy," exclaimed Madame de Villefort,
your son disappeared in pursuit of the peacock."
snatching the mutilated book from the urchin's grasp, "you
"And I caught it, mamma, don't you remember?" interposed are positively past bearing; you really disturb the
Edward, "and I pulled three such beautiful feathers out of his conversation; go, leave us, and join your sister Valentine in
tail."
dear grandpapa Noirtier's room."
"What do you mean? -- the album!"
"I want the album."

"How dare you tear out the drawings?"
"Yes, in truth, yes," answered the young lady, turning very "Oh, it amuses me."
red, "I do remember conversing with a person wrapped in a
"Go -- go at once."
long woollen mantle; he was a medical man, I think."
"Precisely so, madame; this man was myself; for a fortnight I "I won't go unless you give me the album," said the boy,
had been at that hotel, during which period I had cured my seating himself doggedly in an arm-chair, according to his
valet de chambre of a fever, and my landlord of the jaundice, habit of never giving way.

"Let us see if she shuts the door after him," he muttered.
Madame de Villefort closed the door carefully after the child,
the count appearing not to notice her; then casting a
"I do not recollect now all the various subjects of which we scrutinizing glance around the chamber, the young wife
discoursed, madame," continued the count with perfect returned to her chair, in which she seated herself. "Allow me
calmness; "but I perfectly remember that, falling into the to observe, madame," said the count, with that kind tone he
error which others had entertained respecting me, you could assume so well, "you are really very severe with that
dear clever child."
consulted me as to the health of Mademoiselle de Villefort."
"Yes, really, sir, you were in fact a medical man," said "Oh, sometimes severity is quite necessary," replied Madame
de Villefort, with all a mother's real firmness.
Madame de Villefort, "since you had cured the sick."
"Yes, true," replied Madame de Villefort, somewhat uneasily,
"I remember now."

"Moliere or Beaumarchais would reply to you, madame, that
it was precisely because I was not, that I had cured my
patients; for myself, I am content to say to you that I have
studied chemistry and the natural sciences somewhat deeply,
but still only as an amateur, you understand." -- At this
moment the clock struck six. "It is six o'clock," said Madame
de Villefort, evidently agitated. "Valentine, will you not go
and see if your grandpapa will have his dinner?" Valentine
rose, and saluting the count, left the apartment without
speaking.

"It was his Cornelius Nepos that Master Edward was
repeating when he referred to King Mithridates," continued
the count, "and you interrupted him in a quotation which
proves that his tutor has by no means neglected him, for
your son is really advanced for his years."

"The fact is, count," answered the mother, agreeably flattered,
"he has great aptitude, and learns all that is set before him.
He has but one fault, he is somewhat wilful; but really, on
referring for the moment to what he said, do you truly
believe that Mithridates used these precautions, and that
"Oh, madame," said the count, when Valentine had left the these precautions were efficacious?"
room, "was it on my account that you sent Mademoiselle de "I think so, madame, because I myself have made use of
Villefort away?"
them, that I might not be poisoned at Naples, at Palermo,
"By no means," replied the young lady quickly; "but this is and at Smyrna -- that is to say, on three several occasions
the hour when we usually give M. Noirtier the unwelcome when, but for these precautions, I must have lost my life."
meal that sustains his pitiful existence. You are aware, sir, of
217


CHAPTER 52

"And your precautions were successful?"
"Completely so."

TOXICOLOGY
same questions, and said then, that for a very long time this
history of Mithridates had occupied your mind."

"True, sir. The two favorite studies of my youth were botany
and mineralogy, and subsequently, when I learned that the
use of simples frequently explained the whole history of a
"Indeed?" said the count with an air of surprise, remarkably people, and the entire life of individuals in the East, as
well counterfeited; "I really did not remember."
flowers betoken and symbolize a love affair, I have regretted
"I inquired of you if poisons acted equally, and with the that I was not a man, that I might have been a Flamel, a
same effect, on men of the North as on men of the South; and Fontana, or a Cabanis."
you answered me that the cold and sluggish habits of the "And the more, madame," said Monte Cristo, "as the
North did not present the same aptitude as the rich and Orientals do not confine themselves, as did Mithridates, to
energetic temperaments of the natives of the South."
make a cuirass of his poisons, but they also made them a
"And that is the case," observed Monte Cristo. "I have seen dagger. Science becomes, in their hands, not only a defensive
Russians devour, without being visibly inconvenienced, weapon, but still more frequently an offensive one; the one
vegetable substances which would infallibly have killed a serves against all their physical sufferings, the other against
all their enemies. With opium, belladonna, brucaea,
Neapolitan or an Arab."
snake-wood, and the cherry-laurel, they put to sleep all who
"And you really believe the result would be still more sure stand in their way. There is not one of those women,
with us than in the East, and in the midst of our fogs and Egyptian, Turkish, or Greek, whom here you call `good
rains a man would habituate himself more easily than in a women,' who do not know how, by means of chemistry, to
warm latitude to this progressive absorption of poison?"
stupefy a doctor, and in psychology to amaze a confessor."
"Certainly; it being at the same time perfectly understood "Really," said Madame de Villefort, whose eyes sparkled
that he should have been duly fortified against the poison to with strange fire at this conversation.
which he had not been accustomed."
"Oh, yes, indeed, madame," continued Monte Cristo, "the
"Yes, I understand that; and how would you habituate secret dramas of the East begin with a love philtre and end
yourself, for instance, or rather, how did you habituate with a death potion -- begin with paradise and end with -yourself to it?"
hell. There are as many elixirs of every kind as there are
"Oh, very easily. Suppose you knew beforehand the poison caprices and peculiarities in the physical and moral nature of
that would be made use of against you; suppose the poison humanity; and I will say further -- the art of these chemists is
capable with the utmost precision to accommodate and
was, for instance, brucine" -proportion the remedy and the bane to yearnings for love or
"Brucine is extracted from the false angostura* is it not?"
desires for vengeance."
inquired Madame de Villefort.
"But, sir," remarked the young woman, "these Eastern
"Precisely, madame," replied Monte Cristo; "but I perceive I
societies, in the midst of which you have passed a portion of
have not much to teach you. Allow me to compliment you
your existence, are as fantastic as the tales that come from
on your knowledge; such learning is very rare among
their strange land. A man can easily be put out of the way
ladies."
there, then; it is, indeed, the Bagdad and Bassora of the
* Brucoea ferruginea.
`Thousand and One Nights.' The sultans and viziers who
"Oh, I am aware of that," said Madame de Villefort; "but I rule over society there, and who constitute what in France
have a passion for the occult sciences, which speak to the we call the government, are really Haroun-al-Raschids and
imagination like poetry, and are reducible to figures, like an Giaffars, who not only pardon a poisoner, but even make
algebraic equation; but go on, I beg of you; what you say him a prime minister, if his crime has been an ingenious one,
and who, under such circumstances, have the whole story
interests me to the greatest degree."
written in letters of gold, to divert their hours of idleness and
"Well," replied Monte Cristo "suppose, then, that this poison ennui."
was brucine, and you were to take a milligramme the first
day, two milligrammes the second day, and so on. Well, at "By no means, madame; the fanciful exists no longer in the
the end of ten days you would have taken a centigramme, at East. There, disguised under other names, and concealed
the end of twenty days, increasing another milligramme, you under other costumes, are police agents, magistrates,
would have taken three hundred centigrammes; that is to attorneys-general, and bailiffs. They hang, behead, and
say, a dose which you would support without inconvenience, impale their criminals in the most agreeable possible manner;
and which would be very dangerous for any other person but some of these, like clever rogues, have contrived to
who had not taken the same precautions as yourself. Well, escape human justice, and succeed in their fraudulent
then, at the end of a month, when drinking water from the enterprises by cunning stratagems. Amongst us a simpleton,
same carafe, you would kill the person who drank with you, possessed by the demon of hate or cupidity, who has an
without your perceiving, otherwise than from slight enemy to destroy, or some near relation to dispose of, goes
inconvenience, that there was any poisonous substance straight to the grocer's or druggist's, gives a false name,
which leads more easily to his detection than his real one,
mingled with this water."
and under the pretext that the rats prevent him from
"Do you know any other counter-poisons?"
sleeping, purchases five or six grammes of arsenic -- if he is
really a cunning fellow, he goes to five or six different
"I do not."
druggists or grocers, and thereby becomes only five or six
"I have often read, and read again, the history of
times more easily traced; -- then, when he has acquired his
Mithridates," said Madame de Villefort in a tone of reflection,
specific, he administers duly to his enemy, or near kinsman,
"and had always considered it a fable."
a dose of arsenic which would make a mammoth or
"No, madame, contrary to most history, it is true; but what mastodon burst, and which, without rhyme or reason, makes
you tell me, madame, what you inquire of me, is not the his victim utter groans which alarm the entire neighborhood.
result of a chance query, for two years ago you asked me the Then arrive a crowd of policemen and constables. They fetch
"Yes, I remember now your mentioning to me at Perugia
something of this sort."

218

a doctor, who opens the dead body, and collects from the
entrails and stomach a quantity of arsenic in a spoon. Next
day a hundred newspapers relate the fact, with the names of
the victim and the murderer. The same evening the grocer or
grocers, druggist or druggists, come and say, `It was I who
sold the arsenic to the gentleman;' and rather than not
recognize the guilty purchaser, they will recognize twenty.
Then the foolish criminal is taken, imprisoned, interrogated,
confronted, confounded, condemned, and cut off by hemp or
steel; or if she be a woman of any consideration, they lock
her up for life. This is the way in which you Northerns
understand chemistry, madame. Desrues was, however, I
must confess, more skilful."
"What would you have, sir?" said the lady, laughing; "we do
what we can. All the world has not the secret of the Medicis
or the Borgias."
"Now," replied the count, shrugging his shoulders, "shall I
tell you the cause of all these stupidities? It is because, at
your theatres, by what at least I could judge by reading the
pieces they play, they see persons swallow the contents of a
phial, or suck the button of a ring, and fall dead instantly.
Five minutes afterwards the curtain falls, and the spectators
depart. They are ignorant of the consequences of the murder;
they see neither the police commissary with his badge of
office, nor the corporal with his four men; and so the poor
fools believe that the whole thing is as easy as lying. But go a
little way from France -- go either to Aleppo or Cairo, or only
to Naples or Rome, and you will see people passing by you
in the streets -- people erect, smiling, and fresh-colored, of
whom Asmodeus, if you were holding on by the skirt of his
mantle, would say, `That man was poisoned three weeks ago;
he will be a dead man in a month.'"
"Then," remarked Madame de Villefort, "they have again
discovered the secret of the famous aquatofana that they said
was lost at Perugia."
"Ah, but madame, does mankind ever lose anything? The
arts change about and make a tour of the world; things take
a different name, and the vulgar do not follow them -- that is
all; but there is always the same result. Poisons act
particularly on some organ or another -- one on the stomach,
another on the brain, another on the intestines. Well, the
poison brings on a cough, the cough an inflammation of the
lungs, or some other complaint catalogued in the book of
science, which, however, by no means precludes it from
being decidedly mortal; and if it were not, would be sure to
become so, thanks to the remedies applied by foolish doctors,
who are generally bad chemists, and which will act in favor
of or against the malady, as you please; and then there is a
human being killed according to all the rules of art and skill,
and of whom justice learns nothing, as was said by a terrible
chemist of my acquaintance, the worthy Abbe Adelmonte of
Taormina, in Sicily, who has studied these national
phenomena very profoundly."

romance" -"Were objects of art, madame, and nothing more," replied the
count. "Do you suppose that the real savant addresses
himself stupidly to the mere individual? By no means.
Science loves eccentricities, leaps and bounds, trials of
strength, fancies, if I may be allowed so to term them. Thus,
for instance, the excellent Abbe Adelmonte, of whom I spoke
just now, made in this way some marvellous experiments."
"Really?"
"Yes; I will mention one to you. He had a remarkably fine
garden, full of vegetables, flowers, and fruit. From amongst
these vegetables he selected the most simple -- a cabbage, for
instance. For three days he watered this cabbage with a
distillation of arsenic; on the third, the cabbage began to
droop and turn yellow. At that moment he cut it. In the eyes
of everybody it seemed fit for table, and preserved its
wholesome appearance. It was only poisoned to the Abbe
Adelmonte. He then took the cabbage to the room where he
had rabbits -- for the Abbe Adelmonte had a collection of
rabbits, cats, and guinea-pigs, fully as fine as his collection of
vegetables, flowers, and fruit. Well, the Abbe Adelmonte
took a rabbit, and made it eat a leaf of the cabbage. The
rabbit died. What magistrate would find, or even venture to
insinuate, anything against this? What procureur has ever
ventured to draw up an accusation against M. Magendie or
M. Flourens, in consequence of the rabbits, cats, and
guinea-pigs they have killed? -- not one. So, then, the rabbit
dies, and justice takes no notice. This rabbit dead, the Abbe
Adelmonte has its entrails taken out by his cook and thrown
on the dunghill; on this dunghill is a hen, who, pecking these
intestines, is in her turn taken ill, and dies next day. At the
moment when she is struggling in the convulsions of death,
a vulture is flying by (there are a good many vultures in
Adelmonte's country); this bird darts on the dead fowl, and
carries it away to a rock, where it dines off its prey. Three
days afterwards, this poor vulture, which has been very
much indisposed since that dinner, suddenly feels very
giddy while flying aloft in the clouds, and falls heavily into a
fish-pond. The pike, eels, and carp eat greedily always, as
everybody knows -- well, they feast on the vulture. Now
suppose that next day, one of these eels, or pike, or carp,
poisoned at the fourth remove, is served up at your table.
Well, then, your guest will be poisoned at the fifth remove,
and die, at the end of eight or ten days, of pains in the
intestines, sickness, or abscess of the pylorus. The doctors
open the body and say with an air of profound learning,
`The subject his died of a tumor on the liver, or of typhoid
fever!'"
"But," remarked Madame de Villefort, "all these
circumstances which you link thus to one another may be
broken by the least accident; the vulture may not see the
fowl, or may fall a hundred yards from the fish-pond."

"Ah, that is where the art comes in. To be a great chemist in
"It is quite frightful, but deeply interesting," said the young the East, one must direct chance; and this is to be achieved."
lady, motionless with attention. "I thought, I must confess, -- Madame de Villefort was in deep thought, yet listened
that these tales, were inventions of the Middle Ages."
attentively. "But," she exclaimed, suddenly, "arsenic is
indelible, indestructible; in whatsoever way it is absorbed, it
"Yes, no doubt, but improved upon by ours. What is the use
will be found again in the body of the victim from the
of time, rewards of merit, medals, crosses, Monthyon prizes,
moment when it has been taken in sufficient quantity to
if they do not lead society towards more complete perfection?
cause death."
Yet man will never be perfect until he learns to create and
destroy; he does know how to destroy, and that is half the "Precisely so," cried Monte Cristo -- "precisely so; and this is
battle."
what I said to my worthy Adelmonte. He reflected, smiled,
and replied to me by a Sicilian proverb, which I believe is
"So," added Madame de Villefort, constantly returning to her
also a French proverb, `My son, the world was not made in a
object, "the poisons of the Borgias, the Medicis, the Renes,
day -- but in seven. Return on Sunday.' On the Sunday
the Ruggieris, and later, probably, that of Baron de Trenck,
following I did return to him. Instead of having watered his
whose story has been so misused by modern drama and
cabbage with arsenic, he had watered it this time with a
219


CHAPTER 52

solution of salts, having their basis in strychnine, strychnos
colubrina, as the learned term it. Now, the cabbage had not
the slightest appearance of disease in the world, and the
rabbit had not the smallest distrust; yet, five minutes
afterwards, the rabbit was dead. The fowl pecked at the
rabbit, and the next day was a dead hen. This time we were
the vultures; so we opened the bird, and this time all special
symptoms had disappeared, there were only general
symptoms. There was no peculiar indication in any organ -an excitement of the nervous system -- that was it; a case of
cerebral congestion -- nothing more. The fowl had not been
poisoned -- she had died of apoplexy. Apoplexy is a rare
disease among fowls, I believe, but very common among
men." Madame de Villefort appeared more and more
thoughtful.

TOXICOLOGY
for instance, was marvellously served by his conscience after
the putting away of the two children of Edward IV.; in fact,
he could say, `These two children of a cruel and persecuting
king, who have inherited the vices of their father, which I
alone could perceive in their juvenile propensities -- these
two children are impediments in my way of promoting the
happiness of the English people, whose unhappiness they
(the children) would infallibly have caused.' Thus was Lady
Macbeth served by her conscience, when she sought to give
her son, and not her husband (whatever Shakspeare may
say), a throne. Ah, maternal love is a great virtue, a powerful
motive -- so powerful that it excuses a multitude of things,
even if, after Duncan's death, Lady Macbeth had been at all
pricked by her conscience."

Madame de Villefort listened with avidity to these appalling
maxims and horrible paradoxes, delivered by the count with
that ironical simplicity which was peculiar to him. After a
moment's silence, the lady inquired, "Do you know, my dear
count," she said, "that you are a very terrible reasoner, and
"By chemists and persons who have a taste for chemistry,"
that you look at the world through a somewhat distempered
said Monte Cristo carelessly.
medium? Have you really measured the world by scrutinies,
"And then," said Madame de Villefort, endeavoring by a or through alembics and crucibles? For you must indeed be a
struggle, and with effort, to get away from her thoughts, great chemist, and the elixir you administered to my son,
"however skilfully it is prepared, crime is always crime, and which recalled him to life almost instantaneously" -if it avoid human scrutiny, it does not escape the eye of God.
"Oh, do not place any reliance on that, madame; one drop of
The Orientals are stronger than we are in cases of conscience,
that elixir sufficed to recall life to a dying child, but three
and, very prudently, have no hell -- that is the point."
drops would have impelled the blood into his lungs in such
"Really, madame, this is a scruple which naturally must a way as to have produced most violent palpitations; six
occur to a pure mind like yours, but which would easily would have suspended his respiration, and caused syncope
yield before sound reasoning. The bad side of human more serious than that in which he was; ten would have
thought will always be defined by the paradox of Jean destroyed him. You know, madame, how suddenly I
Jacques Rousseau, -- you remember, -- the mandarin who is snatched him from those phials which he so imprudently
killed five hundred leagues off by raising the tip of the finger. touched?"
Man's whole life passes in doing these things, and his
"Is it then so terrible a poison?"
intellect is exhausted by reflecting on them. You will find
very few persons who will go and brutally thrust a knife in "Oh, no. In the first place, let us agree that the word poison
the heart of a fellow-creature, or will administer to him, in does not exist, because in medicine use is made of the most
order to remove him from the surface of the globe on which violent poisons, which become, according as they are
we move with life and animation, that quantity of arsenic of employed, most salutary remedies."
which we just now talked. Such a thing is really out of rule -"What, then, is it?"
eccentric or stupid. To attain such a point, the blood must be
heated to thirty-six degrees, the pulse be, at least, at ninety, "A skilful preparation of my friend's the worthy Abbe
and the feelings excited beyond the ordinary limit. But Adelmonte, who taught me the use of it."
suppose one pass, as is permissible in philology, from the "Oh," observed Madame de Villefort, "it must be an
word itself to its softened synonym, then, instead of admirable anti-spasmodic."
committing an ignoble assassination you make an
`elimination;' you merely and simply remove from your path "Perfect, madame, as you have seen," replied the count; "and
the individual who is in your way, and that without shock or I frequently make use of it -- with all possible prudence
violence, without the display of the sufferings which, in the though, be it observed," he added with a smile of
case of becoming a punishment, make a martyr of the victim, intelligence.
and a butcher, in every sense of the word, of him who inflicts "Most assuredly," responded Madame de Villefort in the
them. Then there will be no blood, no groans, no convulsions, same tone. "As for me, so nervous, and so subject to fainting
and above all, no consciousness of that horrid and fits, I should require a Doctor Adelmonte to invent for me
compromising moment of accomplishing the act, -- then one some means of breathing freely and tranquillizing my mind,
escapes the clutch of the human law, which says, `Do not in the fear I have of dying some fine day of suffocation. In
disturb society!' This is the mode in which they manage the meanwhile, as the thing is difficult to find in France, and
these things, and succeed in Eastern climes, where there are your abbe is not probably disposed to make a journey to
grave and phlegmatic persons who care very little for the Paris on my account, I must continue to use Monsieur
questions of time in conjunctures of importance."
Planche's anti-spasmodics; and mint and Hoffman's drops
"Yet conscience remains," remarked Madame de Villefort in are among my favorite remedies. Here are some lozenges
which I have made up on purpose; they are compounded
an agitated voice, and with a stifled sigh.
doubly strong." Monte Cristo opened the tortoise-shell box,
"Yes," answered Monte Cristo "happily, yes, conscience does which the lady presented to him, and inhaled the odor of the
remain; and if it did not, how wretched we should be! After lozenges with the air of an amateur who thoroughly
every action requiring exertion, it is conscience that saves us, appreciated their composition. "They are indeed exquisite,"
for it supplies us with a thousand good excuses, of which we he said; "but as they are necessarily submitted to the process
alone are judges; and these reasons, howsoever excellent in of deglutition -- a function which it is frequently impossible
producing sleep, would avail us but very little before a for a fainting person to accomplish -- I prefer my own
tribunal, when we were tried for our lives. Thus Richard III., specific."
220
"It is very fortunate," she observed, "that such substances
could only be prepared by chemists; otherwise, all the world
would be poisoning each other."

"Undoubtedly, and so should I prefer it, after the effects I allow myself to be daunted by a first refusal."
have seen produced; but of course it is a secret, and I am not
"A thousand thanks, madame," replied Monte Cristo "but I
so indiscreet as to ask it of you."
have an engagement which I cannot break. I have promised
"But I," said Monte Cristo, rising as he spoke -- "I am gallant to escort to the Academie a Greek princess of my
enough to offer it you."
acquaintance who has never seen your grand opera, and
who relies on me to conduct her thither."
"How kind you are."
"Adieu, then, sir, and do not forget the prescription."
"Only remember one thing -- a small dose is a remedy, a
large one is poison. One drop will restore life, as you have "Ah, in truth, madame, to do that I must forget the hour's
seen; five or six will inevitably kill, and in a way the more conversation I have had with you, which is indeed
terrible inasmuch as, poured into a glass of wine, it would impossible." Monte Cristo bowed, and left the house.
not in the slightest degree affect its flavor. But I say no more, Madame de Villefort remained immersed in thought. "He is
madame; it is really as if I were prescribing for you." The a very strange man," she said, "and in my opinion is himself
clock struck half-past six, and a lady was announced, a the Adelmonte he talks about." As to Monte Cristo the result
friend of Madame de Villefort, who came to dine with her.
had surpassed his utmost expectations. "Good," said he, as
he went away; "this is a fruitful soil, and I feel certain that
"If I had had the honor of seeing you for the third or fourth
the seed sown will not be cast on barren ground." Next
time, count, instead of only for the second," said Madame de
morning, faithful to his promise, he sent the prescription
Villefort; "if I had had the honor of being your friend, instead
requested.
of only having the happiness of being under an obligation to
you, I should insist on detaining you to dinner, and not

221


CHAPTER 53


Chapter 53

ROBERT LE DIABLE

Robert Le Diable

T

he pretext of an opera engagement was so much the
more feasible, as there chanced to be on that very night a
more than ordinary attraction at the Academie Royale.
Levasseur, who had been suffering under severe illness,
made his reappearance in the character of Bertrand, and, as
usual, the announcement of the most admired production of
the favorite composer of the day had attracteda brilliant and
fashionable audience. Morcerf, like most other young men of
rank and fortune, had his orchestra stall, with the certainty
of always finding a seat in at least a dozen of the principal
boxes occupied by persons of his acquaintance; he had,
moreover, his right of entry into the omnibus box.
Chateau-Renaud rented a stall beside his own, while
Beauchamp, as a journalist, had unlimited range all over the
theatre. It happened that on this particular night the
minister's box was placed at the disposal of Lucien Debray,
who offered it to the Comte de Morcerf, who again, upon his
mother's rejection of it, sent it to Danglars, with an
intimation that he should probably do himself the honor of
joining the baroness and her daughter during the evening, in
the event of their accepting the box in question. The ladies
received the offer with too much pleasure to dream of a
refusal. To no class of persons is the presentation of a
gratuitous opera-box more acceptable than to the wealthy
millionaire, who still hugs economy while boasting of
carrying a king's ransom in his waistcoat pocket.
Danglars had, however, protested against showing himself
in a ministerial box, declaring that his political principles,
and his parliamentary position as member of the opposition
party would not permit him so to commit himself; the
baroness had, therefore, despatched a note to Lucien Debray,
bidding him call for them, it being wholly impossible for her
to go alone with Eugenie to the opera. There is no gainsaying
the fact that a very unfavorable construction would have
been put upon the circumstance if the two women had gone
without escort, while the addition of a third, in the person of
her mother's admitted lover, enabled Mademoiselle
Danglars to defy malice and ill-nature. One must take the
world as one finds it.
The curtain rose, as usual, to an almost empty house, it being
one of the absurdities of Parisian fashion never to appear at
the opera until after the beginning of the performance, so
that the first act is generally played without the slightest
attention being paid to it, that part of the audience already
assembled being too much occupied in observing the fresh
arrivals, while nothing is heard but the noise of opening and
shutting doors, and the buzz of conversation. "Surely," said
Albert, as the door of a box on the first circle opened, "that
must be the Countess G---- ."

did for you in Rome?"
"With pleasure."
There was a cry of "Shut up!" from the audience. This
manifestation on the part of the spectators of their wish to be
allowed to hear the music, produced not the slightest effect
on the two young men, who continued their conversation.
"The countess was present at the races in the
Champ-de-Mars," said Chateau-Renaud.
"To-day?"
"Yes."
"Bless me, I quite forgot the races. Did you bet?"
"Oh, merely a paltry fifty louis."
"And who was the winner?"
"Nautilus. I staked on him."
"But there were three races, were there not?"
"Yes; there was the prize given by the Jockey Club -- a gold
cup, you know -- and a very singular circumstance occurred
about that race."
"What was it?"
"Oh, shut up!" again interposed some of the audience.
"Why, it was won by a horse and rider utterly unknown on
the course."
"Is that possible?"
"True as day. The fact was, nobody had observed a horse
entered by the name of Vampa, or that of a jockey styled Job,
when, at the last moment, a splendid roan, mounted by a
jockey about as big as your fist, presented themselves at the
starting-post. They were obliged to stuff at least twenty
pounds weight of shot in the small rider's pockets, to make
him weight; but with all that he outstripped Ariel and
Barbare, against whom he ran, by at least three whole
lengths."
"And was it not found out at last to whom the horse and
jockey belonged?"
"No."
"You say that the horse was entered under the name of
Vampa?"
"Exactly; that was the title."
"Then," answered Albert, "I am better informed than you are,
and know who the owner of that horse was."

"Shut up, there!" cried the pit in chorus. And this time the
tone and manner in which the command was given,
"And who is the Countess G---- ?" inquired Chateau-Renaud.
betokened such growing hostility that the two young men
"What a question! Now, do you know, baron, I have a great perceived, for the first time, that the mandate was addressed
mind to pick a quarrel with you for asking it; as if all the to them. Leisurely turning round, they calmly scrutinized
world did not know who the Countess G---- was."
the various countenances around them, as though
"Ah, to be sure," replied Chateau-Renaud; "the lovely demanding some one person who would take upon himself
the responsibility of what they deemed excessive
Venetian, is it not?"
impertinence; but as no one responded to the challenge, the
"Herself." At this moment the countess perceived Albert, and friends turned again to the front of the theatre, and affected
returned his salutation with a smile. "You know her, it to busy themselves with the stage. At this moment the door
seems?" said Chateau-Renaud.
of the minister's box opened, and Madame Danglars,
accompanied by her daughter, entered, escorted by Lucien
"Franz introduced me to her at Rome," replied Albert.
Debray, who assiduously conducted them to their seats.
"Well, then, will you do as much for me in Paris as Franz
222

"Ha, ha," said Chateau-Renaud, "here comes some friends of
yours, viscount! What are you looking at there? don't you
see they are trying to catch your eye?" Albert turned round,
just in time to receive a gracious wave of the fan from the
baroness; as for Mademoiselle Eugenie, she scarcely
vouchsafed to waste the glances of her large black eyes even
upon the business of the stage. "I tell you what, my dear
fellow," said Chateau-Renaud, "I cannot imagine what
objection you can possibly have to Mademoiselle Danglars -that is, setting aside her want of ancestry and somewhat
inferior rank, which by the way I don't think you care very
much about. Now, barring all that, I mean to say she is a
deuced fine girl!"

destined for a theatrical life; and acting upon this principle,
the banker's daughter, though perfectly willing to allow
Mademoiselle Louise d'Armilly (that was the name of the
young virtuosa) to practice with her through the day, took
especial care not to be seen in her company. Still, though not
actually received at the Hotel Danglars in the light of an
acknowledged friend, Louise was treated with far more
kindness and consideration than is usually bestowed on a
governess.

The curtain fell almost immediately after the entrance of
Madame Danglars into her box, the band quitted the
orchestra for the accustomed half-hour's interval allowed
between the acts, and the audience were left at liberty to
"Handsome, certainly," replied Albert, "but not to my taste, promenade the salon or lobbies, or to pay and receive visits
which I confess, inclines to something softer, gentler, and in their respective boxes. Morcerf and Chateau-Renaud were
more feminine."
amongst the first to avail themselves of this permission. For
an instant the idea struck Madame Danglars that this
"Ah, well," exclaimed Chateau-Renaud, who because he had
eagerness on the part of the young viscount arose from his
seen his thirtieth summer fancied himself duly warranted in
impatience to join her party, and she whispered her
assuming a sort of paternal air with his more youthful friend,
expectations to her daughter, that Albert was hurrying to
"you young people are never satisfied; why, what would you
pay his respects to them. Mademoiselle Eugenie, however,
have more? your parents have chosen you a bride built on
merely returned a dissenting movement of the head, while,
the model of Diana, the huntress, and yet you are not
with a cold smile, she directed the attention of her mother to
content."
an opposite box on the first circle, in which sat the Countess
"No, for that very resemblance affrights me; I should have G---- , and where Morcerf had just made his appearance. "So
liked something more in the manner of the Venus of Milo or we meet again, my travelling friend, do we?" cried the
Capua; but this chase-loving Diana continually surrounded countess, extending her hand to him with all the warmth
by her nymphs gives me a sort of alarm lest she should some and cordiality of an old acquaintance; "it was really very
day bring on me the fate of Actaeon."
good of you to recognize me so quickly, and still more so to
And, indeed, it required but one glance at Mademoiselle bestow your first visit on me."
Danglars to comprehend the justness of Morcerf's remark -- "Be assured," replied Albert, "that if I had been aware of your
she was beautiful, but her beauty was of too marked and arrival in Paris, and had known your address, I should have
decided a character to please a fastidious taste; her hair was paid my respects to you before this. Allow me to introduce
raven black, but its natural waves seemed somewhat my friend, Baron de Chateau-Renaud, one of the few true
rebellious; her eyes, of the same color as her hair, were gentlemen now to be found in France, and from whom I
surmounted by well-arched brows, whose great defect, have just learned that you were a spectator of the races in the
however, consisted in an almost habitual frown, while her Champ-de-Mars, yesterday." Chateau-Renaud bowed to the
whole physiognomy wore that expression of firmness and countess.
decision so little in accordance with the gentler attributes of
"So you were at the races, baron?" inquired the countess
her sex -- her nose was precisely what a sculptor would have
eagerly.
chosen for a chiselled Juno. Her mouth, which might have
been found fault with as too large, displayed teeth of pearly "Yes, madame."
whiteness, rendered still more conspicuous by the brilliant
"Well, then," pursued Madame G---- with considerable
carmine of her lips, contrasting vividly with her naturally
animation, "you can probably tell me who won the Jockey
pale complexion. But that which completed the almost
Club stakes?"
masculine look Morcerf found so little to his taste, was a
dark mole, of much larger dimensions than these freaks of "I am sorry to say I cannot," replied the baron; "and I was just
nature generally are, placed just at the corner of her mouth; asking the same question of Albert."
and the effect tended to increase the expression of "Are you very anxious to know, countess?" asked Albert.
self-dependence that characterized her countenance. The rest
of Mademoiselle Eugenie's person was in perfect keeping "To know what?"
with the head just described; she, indeed, reminded one of "The name of the owner of the winning horse?"
Diana, as Chateau-Renaud observed, but her bearing was
"Excessively; only imagine -- but do tell me, viscount,
more haughty and resolute. As regarded her attainments, the
whether you really are acquainted with it or no?"
only fault to be found with them was the same that a
fastidious connoisseur might have found with her beauty, "I beg your pardon, madame, but you were about to relate
that they were somewhat too erudite and masculine for so some story, were you not? You said, `only imagine,' -- and
young a person. She was a perfect linguist, a first-rate artist, then paused. Pray continue."
wrote poetry, and composed music; to the study of the latter "Well, then, listen. You must know I felt so interested in the
she professed to be entirely devoted, following it with an splendid roan horse, with his elegant little rider, so tastefully
indefatigable perseverance, assisted by a schoolfellow, -- a dressed in a pink satin jacket and cap, that I could not help
young woman without fortune whose talent promised to praying for their success with as much earnestness as though
develop into remarkable powers as a singer. It was rumored the half of my fortune were at stake; and when I saw them
that she was an object of almost paternal interest to one of outstrip all the others, and come to the winning-post in such
the principal composers of the day, who excited her to spare gallant style, I actually clapped my hands with joy. Imagine
no pains in the cultivation of her voice, which might my surprise, when, upon returning home, the first object I
hereafter prove a source of wealth and independence. But met on the staircase was the identical jockey in the pink
this counsel effectually decided Mademoiselle Danglars jacket! I concluded that, by some singular chance, the owner
never to commit herself by being seen in public with one
223


CHAPTER 53


ROBERT LE DIABLE

of the winning horse must live in the same hotel as myself;
but, as I entered my apartments, I beheld the very gold cup
awarded as a prize to the unknown horse and rider. Inside
the cup was a small piece of paper, on which were written
these words -- `From Lord Ruthven to Countess G---- .'"
"Precisely; I was sure of it," said Morcerf.
"Sure of what?"
"That the owner of the horse was Lord Ruthven himself."
"What Lord Ruthven do you mean?"
"Why, our Lord Ruthven -- the Vampire of the Salle
Argentino!"
"Is it possible?" exclaimed the countess; "is he here in Paris?"

that it is as strong as ever. His first astounding act upon
coming amongst us was to present a pair of horses, worth
32,000 francs, to Madame Danglars; his second, the almost
miraculous preservation of Madame de Villefort's life; now it
seems that he has carried off the prize awarded by the
Jockey Club. I therefore maintain, in spite of Morcerf, that
not only is the count the object of interest at this present
moment, but also that he will continue to be so for a month
longer if he pleases to exhibit an eccentricity of conduct
which, after all, may be his ordinary mode of existence."
"Perhaps you are right," said Morcerf; "meanwhile, who is in
the Russian ambassador's box?"
"Which box do you mean?" asked the countess.

"To be sure, -- why not?"

"The one between the pillars on the first tier -- it seems to
have been fitted up entirely afresh."

"And you visit him? -- meet him at your own house and
elsewhere?"

"Did you observe any one during the first act?" asked
Chateau-Renaud.

"I assure you he is my most intimate friend, and M. de
Chateau-Renaud has also the honor of his acquaintance."

"Where?"

"But why are you so sure of his being the winner of the
Jockey Club prize?"
"Was not the winning horse entered by the name of Vampa?"
"What of that?"

"In that box."
"No," replied the countess, "it was certainly empty during
the first act;" then, resuming the subject of their previous
conversation, she said, "And so you really believe it was
your mysterious Count of Monte Cristo that gained the
prize?"

"Why, do you not recollect the name of the celebrated bandit
"I am sure of it."
by whom I was made prisoner?"
"Oh, yes."

"And who afterwards sent the cup to me?"

"And from whose hands the count extricated me in so "Undoubtedly."
wonderful a manner?"
"But I don't know him," said the countess; "I have a great
mind to return it."
"To be sure, I remember it all now."
"Do no such thing, I beg of you; he would only send you
another, formed of a magnificent sapphire, or hollowed out
of a gigantic ruby. It is his way, and you must take him as
"But what could have been his motive for sending the cup to
you find him." At this moment the bell rang to announce the
me?"
drawing up of the curtain for the second act. Albert rose to
"In the first place, because I had spoken much of you to him, return to his place. "Shall I see you again?" asked the
as you may believe; and in the second, because he delighted countess. "At the end of the next act, with your permission, I
to see a countrywoman take so lively an interest in his will come and inquire whether there is anything I can do for
success."
you in Paris?"
"He called himself Vampa. You see. it's evident where the
count got the name."

"I trust and hope you never repeated to the count all the
foolish remarks we used to make about him?"

"Pray take notice," said the countess, "that my present
residence is 22 Rue de Rivoli, and that I am at home to my
"I should not like to affirm upon oath that I have not. Besides, friends every Saturday evening. So now, you are both
his presenting you the cup under the name of Lord Ruthven" forewarned." The young men bowed, and quitted the box.
Upon reaching their stalls, they found the whole of the
-audience in the parterre standing up and directing their gaze
"Oh, but that is dreadful! Why, the man must owe me a towards the box formerly possessed by the Russian
fearful grudge."
ambassador. A man of from thirty-five to forty years of age,
dressed in deep black, had just entered, accompanied by a
"Does his action appear like that of an enemy?"
young woman dressed after the Eastern style. The lady was
"No; certainly not."
surpassingly beautiful, while the rich magnificence of her
"Well, then" -attire drew all eyes upon her. "Hullo," said Albert; "it is
Monte Cristo and his Greek!"
"And so he is in Paris?"
The strangers were, indeed, no other than the count and
"Yes."
Haidee. In a few moments the young girl had attracted the
"And what effect does he produce?"
attention of the whole house, and even the occupants of the
"Why," said Albert, "he was talked about for a week; then the boxes leaned forward to scrutinize her magnificent
coronation of the queen of England took place, followed by diamonds. The second act passed away during one
the theft of Mademoiselle Mars's diamonds; and so people continued buzz of voices -- one deep whisper -- intimating
that some great and universally interesting event had
talked of something else."
occurred; all eyes, all thoughts, were occupied with the
"My good fellow," said Chateau-Renaud, "the count is your young and beautiful woman, whose gorgeous apparel and
friend and you treat him accordingly. Do not believe what splendid jewels made a most extraordinary spectacle. Upon
Albert is telling you, countess; so far from the sensation this occasion an unmistakable sign from Madame Danglars
excited in the Parisian circles by the appearance of the Count intimated her desire to see Albert in her box directly the
of Monte Cristo having abated, I take upon myself to declare curtain fell on the second act, and neither the politeness nor
224

good taste of Morcerf would permit his neglecting an
invitation so unequivocally given. At the close of the act he
therefore went to the baroness. Having bowed to the two
ladies, he extended his hand to Debray. By the baroness he
was most graciously welcomed, while Eugenie received him
with her accustomed coldness.

been touched by any other finger than her own."

"My dear fellow," said Debray, "you have come in the nick of
time. There is madame overwhelming me with questions
respecting the count; she insists upon it that I can tell her his
birth, education, and parentage, where he came from, and
whither he is going. Being no disciple of Cagliostro, I was
wholly unable to do this; so, by way of getting out of the
scrape, I said, `Ask Morcerf; he has got the whole history of
his beloved Monte Cristo at his fingers' ends;' whereupon
the baroness signified her desire to see you."

"I must try and persuade M. Danglars to invite him to a ball
or dinner, or something of the sort, that he may be
compelled to ask us in return."

"Is it not almost incredible," said Madame Danglars, "that a
person having at least half a million of secret-service money
at his command, should possess so little information?"
"Let me assure you, madame," said Lucien, "that had I really
the sum you mention at my disposal, I would employ it
more profitably than in troubling myself to obtain
particulars respecting the Count of Monte Cristo, whose only
merit in my eyes consists in his being twice as rich as a
nabob. However, I have turned the business over to Morcerf,
so pray settle it with him as may be most agreeable to you;
for my own part, I care nothing about the count or his
mysterious doings."

"Then your count entertains visitors, does he?" asked
Madame Danglars.
"Indeed he does, and in a most lavish manner, I can assure
you."

"What," said Debray, laughing; "do you really mean you
would go to his house?"
"Why not? my husband could accompany me."
"But do you know this mysterious count is a bachelor?"
"You have ample proof to the contrary, if you look opposite,"
said the baroness, as she laughingly pointed to the beautiful
Greek.
"No, no!" exclaimed Debray; "that girl is not his wife: he told
us himself she was his slave. Do you not recollect, Morcerf,
his telling us so at your breakfast?"
"Well, then," said the baroness, "if slave she be, she has all
the air and manner of a princess."
"Of the `Arabian Nights'?"
"If you like; but tell me, my dear Lucien, what it is that
constitutes a princess. Why, diamonds -- and she is covered
with them."

"I am very sure no nabob would have sent me a pair of "To me she seems overloaded," observed Eugenie; "she
horses worth 32,000 francs, wearing on their heads four would look far better if she wore fewer, and we should then
diamonds valued at 5,000 francs each."
be able to see her finely formed throat and wrists."
"He seems to have a mania for diamonds," said Morcerf, "See how the artist peeps out!" exclaimed Madame Danglars.
smiling, "and I verily believe that, like Potemkin, he keeps "My poor Eugenie, you must conceal your passion for the
his pockets filled, for the sake of strewing them along the fine arts."
road, as Tom Thumb did his flint stones."
"I admire all that is beautiful," returned the young lady.
"Perhaps he has discovered some mine," said Madame
Danglars. "I suppose you know he has an order for "What do you think of the count?" inquired Debray; "he is
not much amiss, according to my ideas of good looks."
unlimited credit on the baron's banking establishment?"
"I was not aware of it," replied Albert, "but I can readily
believe it."
"And, further, that he stated to M. Danglars his intention of
only staying a year in Paris, during which time he proposed
to spend six millions.
"He must be the Shah of Persia, travelling incog."
"Have you noticed the remarkable beauty of the young
woman, M. Lucien?" inquired Eugenie.

"The count," repeated Eugenie, as though it had not occurred
to her to observe him sooner; "the count? -- oh, he is so
dreadfully pale."
"I quite agree with you," said Morcerf; "and the secret of that
very pallor is what we want to find out. The Countess G---insists upon it that he is a vampire."
"Then the Countess G---- has returned to Paris, has she?"
inquired the baroness.

"Is that she, mamma?" asked Eugenie; "almost opposite to us,
"I really never met with one woman so ready to do justice to with that profusion of beautiful light hair?"
the charms of another as yourself," responded Lucien,
raising his lorgnette to his eye. "A most lovely creature, upon "Yes," said Madame Danglars, "that is she. Shall I tell you
what you ought to do, Morcerf?"
my soul!" was his verdict.
"Who is this young person, M. de Morcerf?" inquired "Command me, madame."
Eugenie; "does anybody know?"

"Well, then, you should go and bring your Count of Monte
"Mademoiselle," said Albert, replying to this direct appeal, "I Cristo to us."
can give you very exact information on that subject, as well "What for?" asked Eugenie.
as on most points relative to the mysterious person of whom
"What for? Why, to converse with him, of course. Have you
we are now conversing -- the young woman is a Greek."
really no desire to meet him?"
"So I should suppose by her dress; if you know no more than
"None whatever," replied Eugenie.
that, every one here is as well-informed as yourself."
"Strange child," murmured the baroness.
"I am extremely sorry you find me so ignorant a cicerone,"
replied Morcerf, "but I am reluctantly obliged to confess, I "He will very probably come of his own accord," said
have nothing further to communicate -- yes, stay, I do know Morcerf. "There; do you see, madame, he recognizes you,
one thing more, namely, that she is a musician, for one day and bows." The baroness returned the salute in the most
when I chanced to be breakfasting with the count, I heard smiling and graceful manner.
the sound of a guzla -- it is impossible that it could have
"Well," said Morcerf, "I may as well be magnanimous, and
225


CHAPTER 53


ROBERT LE DIABLE

tear myself away to forward your wishes. Adieu; I will go
and try if there are any means of speaking to him."
"Go straight to his box; that will be the simplest plan."
"But I have never been presented."
"Presented to whom?"
"To the beautiful Greek."

"Why, the music you have been listening to."
"Oh, it is well enough as the production of a human
composer, sung by featherless bipeds, to quote the late
Diogenes."
"From which it would seem, my dear count, that you can at
pleasure enjoy the seraphic strains that proceed from the
seven choirs of paradise?"

"You say she is only a slave?"

"You are right, in some degree; when I wish to listen to
"While you assert that she is a queen, or at least a princess. sounds more exquisitely attuned to melody than mortal ear
No; I hope that when he sees me leave you, he will come ever yet listened to, I go to sleep."
out."
"Then sleep here, my dear count. The conditions are
favorable; what else was opera invented for?"
"That is possible -- go."
"I am going," said Albert, as he made his parting bow. Just as
he was passing the count's box, the door opened, and Monte
Cristo came forth. After giving some directions to Ali, who
stood in the lobby, the count took Albert's arm. Carefully
closing the box door, Ali placed himself before it, while a
crowd of spectators assembled round the Nubian.
"Upon my word," said Monte Cristo, "Paris is a strange city,
and the Parisians a very singular people. See that cluster of
persons collected around poor Ali, who is as much
astonished as themselves; really one might suppose he was
the only Nubian they had ever beheld. Now I can promise
you, that a Frenchman might show himself in public, either
in Tunis, Constantinople, Bagdad, or Cairo, without being
treated in that way."

"No, thank you. Your orchestra is too noisy. To sleep after
the manner I speak of, absolute calm and silence are
necessary, and then a certain preparation" -"I know -- the famous hashish!"
"Precisely. So, my dear viscount, whenever you wish to be
regaled with music come and sup with me."
"I have already enjoyed that treat when breakfasting with
you," said Morcerf.
"Do you mean at Rome?"
"I do."
"Ah, then, I suppose you heard Haidee's guzla; the poor exile
frequently beguiles a weary hour in playing over to me the
airs of her native land." Morcerf did not pursue the subject,
and Monte Cristo himself fell into a silent reverie. The bell
rang at this moment for the rising of the curtain. "You will
excuse my leaving you," said the count, turning in the
direction of his box.

"That shows that the Eastern nations have too much good
sense to waste their time and attention on objects
undeserving of either. However, as far as Ali is concerned, I
can assure you, the interest he excites is merely from the
circumstance of his being your attendant -- you, who are at
this moment the most celebrated and fashionable person in "What? Are you going?"
Paris."
"Pray, say everything that is kind to Countess G---- on the
"Really? and what has procured me so fluttering a part of her friend the Vampire."
distinction?"
"And what message shall I convey to the baroness!"
"What? why, yourself, to be sure! You give away horses
worth a thousand louis; you save the lives of ladies of high
rank and beauty; under the name of Major Brack you run
thoroughbreds ridden by tiny urchins not larger than
marmots; then, when you have carried off the golden trophy
of victory, instead of setting any value on it, you give it to
the first handsome woman you think of!"

"That, with her permission, I shall do myself the honor of
paying my respects in the course of the evening."

The third act had begun; and during its progress the Count
of Morcerf, according to his promise, made his appearance in
the box of Madame Danglars. The Count of Morcerf was not
a person to excite either interest or curiosity in a place of
public amusement; his presence, therefore, was wholly
"And who has filled your head with all this nonsense?"
unnoticed, save by the occupants of the box in which he had
"Why, in the first place, I heard it from Madame Danglars, just seated himself. The quick eye of Monte Cristo however,
who, by the by, is dying to see you in her box, or to have you marked his coming; and a slight though meaning smile
seen there by others; secondly, I learned it from Beauchamp's passed over his lips. Haidee, whose soul seemed centred in
journal; and thirdly, from my own imagination. Why, if you the business of the stage, like all unsophisticated natures,
delighted in whatever addressed itself to the eye or ear.
sought concealment, did you call your horse Vampa?"
"That was an oversight, certainly," replied the count; "but tell The third act passed off as usual. Mesdemoiselles Noblet,
me, does the Count of Morcerf never visit the Opera? I have Julie, and Leroux executed the customary pirouettes; Robert
duly challenged the Prince of Granada; and the royal father
been looking for him, but without success."
of the princess Isabella, taking his daughter by the hand,
"He will be here to-night."
swept round the stage with majestic strides, the better to
"In what part of the house?"
display the rich folds of his velvet robe and mantle. After
which the curtain again fell, and the spectators poured forth
"In the baroness's box, I believe."
from the theatre into the lobbies and salon. The count left his
"That charming young woman with her is her daughter?"
box, and a moment later was saluting the Baronne Danglars,
who could not restrain a cry of mingled pleasure and
"Yes."
surprise. "You are welcome, count!" she exclaimed, as he
"I congratulate you." Morcerf smiled. "We will discuss that entered. "I have been most anxious to see you, that I might
subject at length some future time," said he. "But what do repeat orally the thanks writing can so ill express."
you think of the music?"
"Surely so trifling a circumstance cannot deserve a place in
"What music?"
your remembrance. Believe me, madame, I had entirely
forgotten it."
226

"But it is not so easy to forget, monsieur, that the very next
day after your princely gift you saved the life of my dear
friend, Madame de Villefort, which was endangered by the
very animals your generosity restored to me."

count, and leaning with him over the front of the box, just as
Haidee, whose eyes were occupied in examining the theatre
in search of her guardian, perceived his pale features close to
Morcerf's face. It was as if the young girl beheld the head of
Medusa. She bent forwards as though to assure herself of the
"This time, at least, I do not deserve your thanks. It was Ali,
reality of what she saw, then, uttering a faint cry, threw
my Nubian slave, who rendered this service to Madame de
herself back in her seat. The sound was heard by the people
Villefort."
about Ali, who instantly opened the box-door. "Why, count,"
"Was it Ali," asked the Count of Morcerf, "who rescued my exclaimed Eugenie, "what has happened to your ward? she
son from the hands of bandits?"
seems to have been taken suddenly ill."
"No, count," replied Monte Cristo taking the hand held out
to him by the general; "in this instance I may fairly and freely
accept your thanks; but you have already tendered them,
and fully discharged your debt -- if indeed there existed one
-- and I feel almost mortified to find you still reverting to the
subject. May I beg of you, baroness, to honor me with an
introduction to your daughter?"

"Very probably," answered the count. "But do not be alarmed
on her account. Haidee's nervous system is delicately
organized, and she is peculiarly susceptible to the odors
even of flowers -- nay, there are some which cause her to
faint if brought into her presence. However," continued
Monte Cristo, drawing a small phial from his pocket, "I have
an infallible remedy." So saying, he bowed to the baroness
"Oh, you are no stranger -- at least not by name," replied and her daughter, exchanged a parting shake of the hand
Madame Danglars, "and the last two or three days we have with Debray and the count, and left Madame Danglars' box.
really talked of nothing but you. Eugenie," continued the Upon his return to Haidee he found her still very pale. As
baroness, turning towards her daughter, "this is the Count of soon as she saw him she seized his hand; her own hands
Monte Cristo." The Count bowed, while Mademoiselle were moist and icy cold. "Who was it you were talking with
Danglars bent her head slightly. "You have a charming over there?" she asked.
young person with you to-night, count," said Eugenie. "Is "With the Count of Morcerf," answered Monte Cristo. "He
she your daughter?"
tells me he served your illustrious father, and that he owes
"No, mademoiselle," said Monte Cristo, astonished at the his fortune to him."
coolness and freedom of the question. "She is a poor
unfortunate Greek left under my care."
"And what is her name?"
"Haidee," replied Monte Cristo.
"A Greek?" murmured the Count of Morcerf.
"Yes, indeed, count," said Madame Danglars; "and tell me,
did you ever see at the court of Ali Tepelini, whom you so
gloriously and valiantly served, a more exquisite beauty or
richer costume?"

"Wretch!" exclaimed Haidee, her eyes flashing with rage; "he
sold my father to the Turks, and the fortune he boasts of was
the price of his treachery! Did not you know that, my dear
lord?"
"Something of this I heard in Epirus," said Monte Cristo; "but
the particulars are still unknown to me. You shall relate
them to me, my child. They are, no doubt, both curious and
interesting."

"Yes, yes; but let us go. I feel as though it would kill me to
remain long near that dreadful man." So saying, Haidee
"Did I hear rightly, monsieur," said Monte Cristo "that you arose, and wrapping herself in her burnoose of white
cashmire embroidered with pearls and coral, she hastily
served at Yanina?"
quitted the box at the moment when the curtain was rising
"I was inspector-general of the pasha's troops," replied
upon the fourth act.
Morcerf; "and it is no secret that I owe my fortune, such as it
"Do you observe," said the Countess G---- to Albert, who had
is, to the liberality of the illustrious Albanese chief."
returned to her side, "that man does nothing like other
"But look!" exclaimed Madame Danglars.
people; he listens most devoutly to the third act of `Robert le
"Where?" stammered Morcerf.
Diable,' and when the fourth begins, takes his departure."
"There," said Monte Cristo placing his arms around the

227


CHAPTER 54


Chapter 54

A FLURRY IN STOCKS

A Flurry In Stocks

S

ome days after this meeting, Albert de Morcerf visited
the Count of Monte Cristo at his house in the Champs
Elysees, which had already assumed that palace-like
appearance which the count's princely fortune enabled him
to give even to his most temporary residences. He came to
renew the thanks of Madame Danglars which had been
already conveyed to the count through the medium of a
letter, signed "Baronne Danglars, nee Hermine de Servieux."
Albert was accompanied by Lucien Debray, who, joining in
his friend's conversation, added some passing compliments,
the source of which the count's talent for finesse easily
enabled him to guess. He was convinced that Lucien's visit
was due to a double feeling of curiosity, the larger half of
which sentiment emanated from the Rue de la Chaussee
d'Antin. In short, Madame Danglars, not being able
personally to examine in detail the domestic economy and
household arrangements of a man who gave away horses
worth 30,000 francs and who went to the opera with a Greek
slave wearing diamonds to the amount of a million of money,
had deputed those eyes, by which she was accustomed to see,
to give her a faithful account of the mode of life of this
incomprehensible person. But the count did not appear to
suspect that there could be the slightest connection between
Lucien's visit and the curiosity of the baroness.
"You are in constant communication with the Baron
Danglars?" the count inquired of Albert de Morcerf.
"Yes, count, you know what I told you?"
"All remains the same, then, in that quarter?"
"It is more than ever a settled thing," said Lucien, -- and,
considering that this remark was all that he was at that time
called upon to make, he adjusted the glass to his eye, and
biting the top of his gold headed cane, began to make the
tour of the apartment, examining the arms and the pictures.
"Ah," said Monte Cristo "I did not expect that the affair
would be so promptly concluded."
"Oh, things take their course without our assistance. While
we are forgetting them, they are falling into their appointed
order; and when, again, our attention is directed to them, we
are surprised at the progress they have made towards the
proposed end. My father and M. Danglars served together in
Spain, my father in the army and M. Danglars in the
commissariat department. It was there that my father, ruined
by the revolution, and M. Danglars, who never had
possessed any patrimony, both laid the foundations of their
different fortunes."
"Yes," said Monte Cristo "I think M. Danglars mentioned that
in a visit which I paid him; and," continued he, casting a
side-glance at Lucien, who was turning over the leaves of an
album, "Mademoiselle Eugenie is pretty -- I think I
remember that to be her name."
"Very pretty, or rather, very beautiful," replied Albert, "but
of that style of beauty which I do not appreciate; I am an
ungrateful fellow."

marriage."
"Mademoiselle Danglars is too rich for me," replied Morcerf,
"and that frightens me."
"Bah," exclaimed Monte Cristo, "that's a fine reason to give.
Are you not rich yourself?"
"My father's income is about 50,000 francs per annum; and
he will give me, perhaps, ten or twelve thousand when I
marry."
"That, perhaps, might not be considered a large sum, in Paris
especially," said the count; "but everything does not depend
on wealth, and it is a fine thing to have a good name, and to
occupy a high station in society. Your name is celebrated,
your position magnificent; and then the Comte de Morcerf is
a soldier, and it is pleasing to see the integrity of a Bayard
united to the poverty of a Duguesclin; disinterestedness is
the brightest ray in which a noble sword can shine. As for
me, I consider the union with Mademoiselle Danglars a most
suitable one; she will enrich you, and you will ennoble her."
Albert shook his head, and looked thoughtful. "There is still
something else," said he.
"I confess," observed Monte Cristo, "that I have some
difficulty in comprehending your objection to a young lady
who is both rich and beautiful."
"Oh," said Morcerf, "this repugnance, if repugnance it may
be called, is not all on my side."
"Whence can it arise, then? for you told me your father
desired the marriage."
"It is my mother who dissents; she has a clear and
penetrating judgment, and does not smile on the proposed
union. I cannot account for it, but she seems to entertain
some prejudice against the Danglars."
"Ah," said the count, in a somewhat forced tone, "that may
be easily explained; the Comtesse de Morcerf, who is
aristocracy and refinement itself, does not relish the idea of
being allied by your marriage with one of ignoble birth; that
is natural enough."
"I do not know if that is her reason," said Albert, "but one
thing I do know, that if this marriage be consummated, it
will render her quite miserable. There was to have been a
meeting six weeks ago in order to talk over and settle the
affair; but I had such a sudden attack of indisposition" -"Real?" interrupted the count, smiling.
"Oh, real enough, from anxiety doubtless, -- at any rate they
postponed the matter for two months. There is no hurry, you
know. I am not yet twenty-one, and Eugenie is only
seventeen; but the two months expire next week. It must be
done. My dear count, you cannot imagine now my mind is
harassed. How happy you are in being exempt from all this!"
"Well, and why should not you be free, too? What prevents
you from being so?"

"You speak as if you were already her husband."

"Oh, it will be too great a disappointment to my father if I do
not marry Mademoiselle Danglars."

"Ah," returned Albert, in his turn looking around to see what
Lucien was doing.

"Marry her then," said the count, with a significant shrug of
the shoulders.

"Really," said Monte Cristo, lowering his voice, "you do not "Yes," replied Morcerf, "but that will plunge my mother into
appear to me to be very enthusiastic on the subject of this positive grief."
228

"Then do not marry her," said the count.

"How would you set about it?"

"Well, I shall see. I will try and think over what is the best
thing to be done; you will give me your advice, will you not,
and if possible extricate me from my unpleasant position? I
think, rather than give pain to my dear mother, I would run
the risk of offending the count." Monte Cristo turned away;
he seemed moved by this last remark. "Ah," said he to
Debray, who had thrown himself into an easy-chair at the
farthest extremity of the salon, and who held a pencil in his
right hand and an account book in his left, "what are you
doing there? Are you making a sketch after Poussin?"

"Ah, that would be easy enough -- I would give her a lesson."
"A lesson?"
"Yes. Your position as secretary to the minister renders your
authority great on the subject of political news; you never
open your mouth but the stockbrokers immediately
stenograph your words. Cause her to lose a hundred
thousand francs, and that would teach her prudence."
"I do not understand," stammered Lucien.

"It is very clear, notwithstanding," replied the young man,
with an artlessness wholly free from affectation; "tell her
some fine morning an unheard-of piece of intelligence -some telegraphic despatch, of which you alone are in
possession; for instance, that Henri IV. was seen yesterday at
"In arithmetic?"
Gabrielle's. That would boom the market; she will buy
"Yes; I am calculating -- by the way, Morcerf, that indirectly
heavily, and she will certainly lose when Beauchamp
concerns you -- I am calculating what the house of Danglars
announces the following day, in his gazette, `The report
must have gained by the last rise in Haiti bonds; from 206
circulated by some usually well-informed persons that the
they have risen to 409 in three days, and the prudent banker
king was seen yesterday at Gabrielle's house, is totally
had purchased at 206; therefore he must have made 300,000
without foundation. We can positively assert that his majesty
livres."
did not quit the Pont-Neuf.'" Lucien half smiled. Monte
"That is not his biggest scoop," said Morcerf; "did he not Cristo, although apparently indifferent, had not lost one
make a million in Spaniards this last year?"
word of this conversation, and his penetrating eye had even
read a hidden secret in the embarrassed manner of the
"My dear fellow," said Lucien, "here is the Count of Monte
secretary. This embarrassment had completely escaped
Cristo, who will say to you, as the Italians do, -Albert, but it caused Lucien to shorten his visit; he was
"`Danaro e santita, Meta della meta.'*
evidently ill at ease. The count, in taking leave of him, said
something in a low voice, to which he answered, "Willingly,
* "Money and sanctity, Each in a moiety.
count; I accept." The count returned to young Morcerf.
"When they tell me such things, I only shrug my shoulders
"Do you not think, on reflection," said he to him, "that you
and say nothing."
have done wrong in thus speaking of your mother-in-law in
"But you were speaking of Haitians?" said Monte Cristo.
the presence of M. Debray?"
"Ah, Haitians, -- that is quite another thing! Haitians are the "My dear count," said Morcerf, "I beg of you not to apply
ecarte of French stock-jobbing. We may like bouillotte, that title so prematurely."
delight in whist, be enraptured with boston, and yet grow
tired of them all; but we always come back to ecarte -- it is "Now, speaking without any exaggeration, is your mother
not only a game, it is a hors-d'oeuvre! M. Danglars sold really so very much averse to this marriage?"
yesterday at 405, and pockets 300,000 francs. Had he but "So much so that the baroness very rarely comes to the house,
waited till to-day, the price would have fallen to 205, and and my mother, has not, I think, visited Madame Danglars
instead of gaining 300,000 francs, he would have lost 20 or twice in her whole life."
25,000."
"Then," said the count, "I am emboldened to speak openly to
"And what has caused the sudden fall from 409 to 206?" you. M. Danglars is my banker; M. de Villefort has
asked Monte Cristo. "I am profoundly ignorant of all these overwhelmed me with politeness in return for a service
stock-jobbing intrigues."
which a casual piece of good fortune enabled me to render
"Because," said Albert, laughing, "one piece of news follows him. I predict from all this an avalanche of dinners and routs.
another, and there is often great dissimilarity between them." Now, in order not to presume on this, and also to be
beforehand with them, I have, if agreeable to you, thought of
"Ah," said the count, "I see that M. Danglars is accustomed to inviting M. and Madame Danglars, and M. and Madame de
play at gaining or losing 300,000 francs in a day; he must be Villefort, to my country-house at Auteuil. If I were to invite
enormously rich."
you and the Count and Countess of Morcerf to this dinner, I
"It is not he who plays!" exclaimed Lucien; "it is Madame should give it the appearance of being a matrimonial
meeting, or at least Madame de Morcerf would look upon
Danglars: she is indeed daring."
the affair in that light, especially if Baron Danglars did me
"But you who are a reasonable being, Lucien, and who know
the honor to bring his daughter. In that case your mother
how little dependence is to be placed on the news, since you
would hold me in aversion, and I do not at all wish that; on
are at the fountain-head, surely you ought to prevent it," said
the contrary, I desire to stand high in her esteem."
Morcerf, with a smile.
"Indeed, count," said Morcerf, "I thank you sincerely for
"How can I, if her husband fails in controlling her?" asked
having used so much candor towards me, and I gratefully
Lucien; "you know the character of the baroness -- no one
accept the exclusion which you propose. You say you desire
has any influence with her, and she does precisely what she
my mother's good opinion; I assure you it is already yours to
pleases."
a very unusual extent."
"Ah, if I were in your place" -- said Albert.
"Do you think so?" said Monte Cristo, with interest.
"Well?"
"Oh, I am sure of it; we talked of you an hour after you left
"I would reform her; it would be rendering a service to her us the other day. But to return to what we were saying. If my
future son-in-law."
mother could know of this attention on your part -- and I
"Oh, no," was the tranquil response; "I am too fond of art to
attempt anything of that sort. I am doing a little sum in
arithmetic."

229


CHAPTER 54


A FLURRY IN STOCKS

will venture to tell her -- I am sure that she will be most
grateful to you; it is true that my father will be equally
angry." The count laughed. "Well," said he to Morcerf, "but I
think your father will not be the only angry one; M. and
Madame Danglars will think me a very ill-mannered person.
They know that I am intimate with you -- that you are, in
fact; one of the oldest of my Parisian acquaintances -- and
they will not find you at my house; they will certainly ask
me why I did not invite you. Be sure to provide yourself
with some previous engagement which shall have a
semblance of probability, and communicate the fact to me by
a line in writing. You know that with bankers nothing but a
written document will be valid."
"I will do better than that," said Albert; "my mother is
wishing to go to the sea-side -- what day is fixed for your
dinner?"
"Saturday."

the contrary, I have a most important engagement."
"Ah, take care, you were teaching me just now how, in case
of an invitation to dinner, one might creditably make an
excuse. I require the proof of a pre-engagement. I am not a
banker, like M. Danglars, but I am quite as incredulous as he
is."
"I am going to give you a proof," replied the count, and he
rang the bell.
"Humph," said Morcerf, "this is the second time you have
refused to dine with my mother; it is evident that you wish
to avoid her." Monte Cristo started. "Oh, you do not mean
that," said he; "besides, here comes the confirmation of my
assertion." Baptistin entered, and remained standing at the
door. "I had no previous knowledge of your visit, had I?"
"Indeed, you are such an extraordinary person, that I would
not answer for it."

"This is Tuesday -- well, to-morrow evening we leave, and
the day after we shall be at Treport. Really, count, you have
a delightful way of setting people at their ease."

"At all events, I could not guess that you would invite me to
dinner."

"This very day."

five," replied the valet.

"Probably not."
"Indeed, you give me more credit than I deserve; I only wish "Well, listen, Baptistin, what did I tell you this morning
to do what will be agreeable to you, that is all."
when I called you into my laboratory?"
"When shall you send your invitations?"
"To close the door against visitors as soon as the clock struck
"Well, I will immediately call on M. Danglars, and tell him "What then?"
that my mother and myself must leave Paris to-morrow. I "Ah, my dear count," said Albert.
have not seen you, consequently I know nothing of your
"No, no, I wish to do away with that mysterious reputation
dinner."
that you have given me, my dear viscount; it is tiresome to
"How foolish you are! Have you forgotten that M. Debray be always acting Manfred. I wish my life to be free and open.
has just seen you at my house?"
Go on, Baptistin."
"Ah, true,"
"Then to admit no one except Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti
"Fix it this way. I have seen you, and invited you without
any ceremony, when you instantly answered that it would
be impossible for you to accept, as you were going to
Treport."
"Well, then, that is settled; but you will come and call on my
mother before to-morrow?"
"Before to-morrow? -- that will be a difficult matter to
arrange, besides, I shall just be in the way of all the
preparations for departure."
"Well, you can do better. You were only a charming man
before, but, if you accede to my proposal, you will be
adorable."
"What must I do to attain such sublimity?"
"You are to-day free as air -- come and dine with me; we
shall be a small party -- only yourself, my mother, and I. You
have scarcely seen my mother; you shall have an
opportunity of observing her more closely. She is a
remarkable woman, and I only regret that there does not
exist another like her, about twenty years younger; in that
case, I assure you, there would very soon be a Countess and
Viscountess of Morcerf. As to my father, you will not see
him; he is officially engaged, and dines with the chief
referendary. We will talk over our travels; and you, who
have seen the whole world, will relate your adventures -you shall tell us the history of the beautiful Greek who was
with you the other night at the Opera, and whom you call
your slave, and yet treat like a princess. We will talk Italian
and Spanish. Come, accept my invitation, and my mother
will thank you."
"A thousand thanks," said the count, "your invitation is most
gracious, and I regret exceedingly that it is not in my power
to accept it. I am not so much at liberty as you suppose; on
230

and his son."
"You hear -- Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti -- a man who
ranks amongst the most ancient nobility of Italy, whose
name Dante has celebrated in the tenth canto of `The
Inferno,' you remember it, do you not? Then there is his son,
Andrea, a charming young man, about your own age,
viscount, bearing the same title as yourself, and who is
making his entry into the Parisian world, aided by his
father's millions. The major will bring his son with him this
evening, the contino, as we say in Italy; he confides him to
my care. If he proves himself worthy of it, I will do what I
can to advance his interests. You will assist me in the work,
will you not?"
"Most undoubtedly. This Major Cavalcanti is an old friend of
yours, then?"
"By no means. He is a perfect nobleman, very polite, modest,
and agreeable, such as may be found constantly in Italy,
descendants of very ancient families. I have met him several
times at Florence, Bologna and Lucca, and he has now
communicated to me the fact of his arrival in Paris. The
acquaintances one makes in travelling have a sort of claim
on one; they everywhere expect to receive the same attention
which you once paid them by chance, as though the civilities
of a passing hour were likely to awaken any lasting interest
in favor of the man in whose society you may happen to be
thrown in the course of your journey. This good Major
Cavalcanti is come to take a second view of Paris, which he
only saw in passing through in the time of the Empire, when
he was on his way to Moscow. I shall give him a good dinner,
he will confide his son to my care, I will promise to watch
over him, I shall let him follow in whatever path his folly
may lead him, and then I shall have done my part."
"Certainly; I see you are a model Mentor," said Albert

"Good-by, we shall return on Sunday. By the way, I have
received news of Franz."

manner possible. Therefore, if you part with M. Baptistin,
give me the refusal of him."

"Have you? Is he still amusing himself in Italy?"

"By all means."

"I believe so; however, he regrets your absence extremely.
He says you were the sun of Rome, and that without you all
appears dark and cloudy; I do not know if he does not even
go so far as to say that it rains."

"That is not all; give my compliments to your illustrious
Luccanese, Cavalcante of the Cavalcanti; and if by any
chance he should be wishing to establish his son, find him a
wife very rich, very noble on her mother's side at least, and a
baroness in right of her father, I will help you in the search."

"His opinion of me is altered for the better, then?"
"No, he still persists in looking upon you as the most
incomprehensible and mysterious of beings."
"He is a charming young man," said Monte Cristo "and I felt
a lively interest in him the very first evening of my
introduction, when I met him in search of a supper, and
prevailed upon him to accept a portion of mine. He is, I
think, the son of General d'Epinay?"
"He is."
"The same who was so shamefully assassinated in 1815?"
"By the Bonapartists."
"Yes. Really I like him extremely; is there not also a
matrimonial engagement contemplated for him?"
"Yes, he is to marry Mademoiselle de Villefort."
"Indeed?"
"And you know I am to marry Mademoiselle Danglars," said
Albert, laughing.
"You smile."
"Yes."
"Why do you do so?"
"I smile because there appears to me to be about as much
inclination for the consummation of the engagement in
question as there is for my own. But really, my dear count,
we are talking as much of women as they do of us; it is
unpardonable." Albert rose.
"Are you going?"
"Really, that is a good idea! -- two hours have I been boring
you to death with my company, and then you, with the
greatest politeness, ask me if I am going. Indeed, count, you
are the most polished man in the world. And your servants,
too, how very well behaved they are; there is quite a style
about them. Monsieur Baptistin especially; I could never get
such a man as that. My servants seem to imitate those you
sometimes see in a play, who, because they have only a
word or two to say, aquit themselves in the most awkward

"Ah, ha; you will do as much as that, will you?"
"Yes."
"Well, really, nothing is certain in this world."
"Oh, count, what a service you might render me! I should
like you a hundred times better if, by your intervention, I
could manage to remain a bachelor, even were it only for ten
years."
"Nothing is impossible," gravely replied Monte Cristo; and
taking leave of Albert, he returned into the house, and struck
the gong three times. Bertuccio appeared. "Monsieur
Bertuccio, you understand that I intend entertaining
company on Saturday at Auteuil." Bertuccio slightly started.
"I shall require your services to see that all be properly
arranged. It is a beautiful house, or at all events may be
made so."
"There must be a good deal done before it can deserve that
title, your excellency, for the tapestried hangings are very
old."
"Let them all be taken away and changed, then, with the
exception of the sleeping-chamber which is hung with red
damask; you will leave that exactly as it is." Bertuccio bowed.
"You will not touch the garden either; as to the yard, you
may do what you please with it; I should prefer that being
altered beyond all recognition."
"I will do everything in my power to carry out your wishes,
your excellency. I should be glad, however, to receive your
excellency's commands concerning the dinner."
"Really, my dear M. Bertuccio," said the count, "since you
have been in Paris, you have become quite nervous, and
apparently out of your element; you no longer seem to
understand me."
"But surely your excellency will be so good as to inform me
whom you are expecting to receive?"
"I do not yet know myself, neither is it necessary that you
should do so. `Lucullus dines with Lucullus,' that is quite
sufficient." Bertuccio bowed, and left the room.

231


CHAPTER 55


Chapter 55

MAJOR CAVALCANTI

Major Cavalcanti

B

oth the count and Baptistin had told the truth when they
announced to Morcerf the proposed visit of the major,
which had served Monte Cristo as a pretext for declining
Albert's invitation. Seven o'clock had just struck, and M.
Bertuccio, according to the command which had been given
him, had two hours before left for Auteuil, when a cab
stopped at the door, and after depositing its occupant at the
gate, immediately hurried away, as if ashamed of its
employment. The visitor was about fifty-two years of age,
dressed in one of the green surtouts, ornamented with black
frogs, which have so long maintained their popularity all
over Europe. He wore trousers of blue cloth, boots tolerably
clean, but not of the brightest polish, and a little too thick in
the soles, buckskin gloves, a hat somewhat resembling in
shape those usually worn by the gendarmes, and a black
cravat striped with white, which, if the proprietor had not
worn it of his own free will, might have passed for a halter,
so much did it resemble one. Such was the picturesque
costume of the person who rang at the gate, and demanded
if it was not at No. 30 in the Avenue des Champs-Elysees
that the Count of Monte Cristo lived, and who, being
answered by the porter in the affirmative, entered, closed the
gate after him, and began to ascend the steps.

"Ex-major in the Austrian service?"

"Yes; I had been told that I should see you to-day at seven
o'clock."

"Be it half a million. then; but on my word of honor, I had no
idea that it was so much."

"Then you have received full information concerning my
arrival?"

"Because you are robbed by your steward. You must make
some reformation in that quarter."

"Of course."

"You have opened my eyes," said the Italian gravely; "I will
show the gentlemen the door." Monte Cristo resumed the
perusal of the letter: --

"Was I a major?" timidly asked the old soldier.
"Yes," said Monte Cristo "you were a major; that is the title
the French give to the post which you filled in Italy."
"Very good," said the major, "I do not demand more, you
understand" -"Your visit here to-day is not of your own suggestion, is it?"
said Monte Cristo.
"No, certainly not."
"You were sent by some other person?"
"Yes."
"By the excellent Abbe Busoni?"
"Exactly so," said the delighted major.
"And you have a letter?"
"Yes, there it is."

"Give it me, then;" and Monte Cristo took the letter, which he
opened and read. The major looked at the count with his
large staring eyes, and then took a survey of the apartment,
but his gaze almost immediately reverted to the proprietor
The small and angular head of this man, his white hair and
of the room. "Yes, yes, I see. `Major Cavalcanti, a worthy
thick gray mustaches, caused him to be easily recognized by
patrician of Lucca, a descendant of the Cavalcanti of
Baptistin, who had received an exact description of the
Florence,'" continued Monte Cristo, reading aloud,
expected visitor, and who was awaiting him in the hall.
"`possessing an income of half a million.'" Monte Cristo
Therefore, scarcely had the stranger time to pronounce his
raised his eyes from the paper, and bowed. "Half a million,"
name before the count was apprised of his arrival. He was
said he, "magnificent!"
ushered into a simple and elegant drawing-room, and the
count rose to meet him with a smiling air. "Ah, my dear sir, "Half a million, is it?" said the major.
you are most welcome; I was expecting you."
"Yes, in so many words; and it must be so, for the abbe
"Indeed," said the Italian, "was your excellency then aware of knows correctly the amount of all the largest fortunes in
Europe."
my visit?"

"Ah, so much the better, I feared this little precaution might
have been forgotten."
"What precaution?"
"That of informing you beforehand of my coming."
"Oh, no, it has not."
"But you are sure you are not mistaken."
"Very sure."
"It really was I whom your excellency expected at seven
o'clock this evening?"
"I will prove it to you beyond a doubt."
"Oh, no, never mind that," said the Italian; "it is not worth
the trouble."

"`And who only needs one thing more to make him happy.'"
"Yes, indeed but one!" said the major with a sigh.
"`Which is to recover a lost and adored son.'"
"A lost and adored son!"
"`Stolen away in his infancy, either by an enemy of his noble
family or by the gypsies.'"
"At the age of five years!" said the major with a deep sigh,
and raising his eye to heaven.
"Unhappy father," said Monte Cristo. The count continued: --

"`I have given him renewed life and hope, in the assurance
that you have the power of restoring the son whom he has
"Yes, yes," said Monte Cristo. His visitor appeared slightly vainly sought for fifteen years.'" The major looked at the
uneasy. "Let me see," said the count; "are you not the count with an indescribable expression of anxiety. "I have
Marquis Bartolomeo Cavalcanti?"
the power of so doing," said Monte Cristo. The major
"Bartolomeo Cavalcanti," joyfully replied the Italian; "yes, I recovered his self-possession. "So, then," said he, "the letter
was true to the end?"
am really he."
232

"Did you doubt it, my dear Monsieur Bartolomeo?"

Baptistin left the room. "Really," said the major, "I am quite
ashamed of the trouble I am giving you."

"No, indeed; certainly not; a good man, a man holding
religious office, as does the Abbe Busoni, could not "Pray don't mention such a thing," said the count. Baptistin
condescend to deceive or play off a joke; but your excellency re-entered with glasses, wine, and biscuits. The count filled
has not read all."
one glass, but in the other he only poured a few drops of the
ruby-colored liquid. The bottle was covered with spiders'
"Ah, true," said Monte Cristo "there is a postscript."
webs, and all the other signs which indicate the age of wine
"Yes, yes," repeated the major, "yes -- there -- is -- a -- more truly than do wrinkles on a man's face. The major
postscript."
made a wise choice; he took the full glass and a biscuit. The
"`In order to save Major Cavalcanti the trouble of drawing count told Baptistin to leave the plate within reach of his
on his banker, I send him a draft for 2,000 francs to defray guest, who began by sipping the Alicante with an expression
his travelling expenses, and credit on you for the further of great satisfaction, and then delicately steeped his biscuit in
sum of 48,000 francs, which you still owe me.'" The major the wine.
awaited the conclusion of the postscript, apparently with
great anxiety. "Very good," said the count.
"He said `very good,'" muttered the major, "then -- sir" -replied he.
"Then what?" asked Monte Cristo.
"Then the postscript" -"Well; what of the postscript?"
"Then the postscript is as favorably received by you as the
rest of the letter?"

"So, sir, you lived at Lucca, did you? You were rich, noble,
held in great esteem -- had all that could render a man
happy?"
"All," said the major, hastily swallowing his biscuit,
"positively all."
"And yet there was one thing wanting in order to complete
your happiness?"
"Only one thing," said the Italian.
"And that one thing, your lost child."

"Certainly; the Abbe Busoni and myself have a small account
open between us. I do not remember if it is exactly 48,000
francs, which I am still owing him, but I dare say we shall
not dispute the difference. You attached great importance,
then, to this postscript, my dear Monsieur Cavalcanti?"

"Ah," said the major, taking a second biscuit, "that
consummation of my happiness was indeed wanting." The
worthy major raised his eyes to heaven and sighed.

"Don't mention it." The major drew an arm-chair towards
him, and proceeded to seat himself.

major, taking a third biscuit.

"Let me hear, then," said the count, "who this deeply
regretted son was; for I always understood you were a
"I must explain to you," said the major, "that, fully confiding bachelor."
in the signature of the Abbe Busoni, I had not provided "That was the general opinion, sir," said the major, "and I" -myself with any other funds; so that if this resource had
"Yes," replied the count, "and you confirmed the report. A
failed me, I should have found myself very unpleasantly
youthful indiscretion, I suppose, which you were anxious to
situated in Paris."
conceal from the world at large?" The major recovered
"Is it possible that a man of your standing should be himself, and resumed his usual calm manner, at the same
embarrassed anywhere?" said Monte Cristo.
time casting his eyes down, either to give himself time to
compose his countenance, or to assist his imagination, all the
"Why, really I know no one," said the major.
while giving an under-look at the count, the protracted smile
"But then you yourself are known to others?"
on whose lips still announced the same polite curiosity.
"Yes," said the major, "I did wish this fault to be hidden from
"Yes, I am known, so that" -every eye."
"Proceed, my dear Monsieur Cavalcanti."
"Not on your own account, surely," replied Monte Cristo;
"So that you will remit to me these 48,000 francs?"
"for a man is above that sort of thing?"
"Certainly, at your first request." The major's eyes dilated
"Oh, no, certainly not on my own account," said the major
with pleasing astonishment. "But sit down," said Monte
with a smile and a shake of the head.
Cristo; "really I do not know what I have been thinking of -- I
have positively kept you standing for the last quarter of an "But for the sake of the mother?" said the count.
hour."
"Yes, for the mother's sake -- his poor mother!" cried the

"Now," said the count, "what will you take -- a glass of port,
sherry, or Alicante?"

"Take some more wine, my dear Cavalcanti," said the count,
pouring out for him a second glass of Alicante; "your
emotion has quite overcome you."

"His poor mother," murmured the major, trying to get the
lachrymal gland in operation, so as to moisten the corner of
"I have some that is very good. You will take a biscuit with it,
his eye with a false tear.
will you not?"
"She belonged to one of the first families in Italy, I think, did
"Yes, I will take a biscuit, as you are so obliging."
she not?"
Monte Cristo rang; Baptistin appeared. The count advanced
"She was of a noble family of Fiesole, count."
to meet him. "Well?" said he in a low voice. "The young man
"And her name was" -is here," said the valet de chambre in the same tone.
"Alicante, if you please; it is my favorite wine."

"Into what room did you take him?"

"Do you desire to know her name?" --

"Into the blue drawing-room, according to your excellency's
orders."

"Oh," said Monte Cristo "it would be quite superfluous for
you to tell me, for I already know it."

"That's right; now bring the Alicante and some biscuits."

"The count knows everything," said the Italian, bowing.
233


CHAPTER 55


MAJOR CAVALCANTI

"Oliva Corsinari, was it not?"

to me to bring them."

"Oliva Corsinari."

"I do not at all wonder at it -- one cannot think of everything;
but, happily, the Abbe Busoni thought for you."

"A marchioness?"
"A marchioness."
"And you married her at last, notwithstanding the
opposition of her family?"
"Yes, that was the way it ended."
"And you have doubtless brought all your papers with you?"
said Monte Cristo.
"What papers?"
"The certificate of your marriage with Oliva Corsinari, and
the register of your child's birth."
"The register of my child's birth?"
"The register of the birth of Andrea Cavalcanti -- of your son;
is not his name Andrea?"
"I believe so," said the major.
"What? You believe so?"
"I dare not positively assert it, as he has been lost for so long
a time."
"Well, then," said Monte Cristo "you have all the documents
with you?"
"Your excellency, I regret to say that, not knowing it was
necessary to come provided with these papers, I neglected to
bring them."
"That is unfortunate," returned Monte Cristo.
"Were they, then, so necessary?"

"He is an excellent person."
"He is extremely prudent and thoughtful"
"He is an admirable man," said the major; "and he sent them
to you?"
"Here they are."
The major clasped his hands in token of admiration. "You
married Oliva Corsinari in the church of San Paolo del
Monte-Cattini; here is the priest's certificate."
"Yes indeed, there it is truly," said the Italian, looking on
with astonishment.
"And here is Andrea Cavalcanti's baptismal register, given
by the curate of Saravezza."
"All quite correct."
"Take these documents, then; they do not concern me. You
will give them to your son, who will, of course, take great
care of them."
"I should think so, indeed! If he were to lose them" -"Well, and if he were to lose them?" said Monte Cristo.
"In that case," replied the major, "it would be necessary to
write to the curate for duplicates, and it would be some time
before they could be obtained."
"It would be a difficult matter to arrange," said Monte Cristo.
"Almost an impossibility," replied the major.

"They were indispensable."

"I am very glad to see that you understand the value of these
papers."

The major passed his hand across his brow. "Ah, per Bacco,
indispensable, were they?"

"I regard them as invaluable."

"Certainly they were; supposing there were to be doubts
raised as to the validity of your marriage or the legitimacy of
your child?"
"True," said the major, "there might be doubts raised."
"In that case your son would be very unpleasantly situated."
"It would be fatal to his interests."

"Now," said Monte Cristo "as to the mother of the young
man" -"As to the mother of the young man" -- repeated the Italian,
with anxiety.
"As regards the Marchesa Corsinari" -"Really," said the major, "difficulties seem to thicken upon us;
will she be wanted in any way?"

"It might cause him to fail in some desirable matrimonial "No, sir," replied Monte Cristo; "besides, has she not" -alliance."
"Yes, sir," said the major, "she has" -"O peccato!"
"Paid the last debt of nature?"
"You must know that in France they are very particular on
"Alas, yes," returned the Italian.
these points; it is not sufficient, as in Italy, to go to the priest
and say, `We love each other, and want you to marry us.' "I knew that," said Monte Cristo; "she has been dead these
Marriage is a civil affair in France, and in order to marry in ten years."
an orthodox manner you must have papers which
"And I am still mourning her loss," exclaimed the major,
undeniably establish your identity."
drawing from his pocket a checked handkerchief, and
"That is the misfortune! You see I have not these necessary alternately wiping first the left and then the right eye.
papers."
"What would you have?" said Monte Cristo; "we are all
"Fortunately, I have them, though," said Monte Cristo.
mortal. Now, you understand, my dear Monsieur Cavalcanti,
that it is useless for you to tell people in France that you
"You?"
have been separated from your son for fifteen years. Stories
"Yes."
of gypsies, who steal children, are not at all in vogue in this
part of the world, and would not be believed. You sent him
"You have them?"
for his education to a college in one of the provinces, and
"I have them."
now you wish him to complete his education in the Parisian
"Ah, indeed?" said the major, who, seeing the object of his world. That is the reason which has induced you to leave Via
journey frustrated by the absence of the papers, feared also Reggio, where you have lived since the death of your wife.
that his forgetfulness might give rise to some difficulty That will be sufficient."
concerning the 48,000 francs -- "ah, indeed, that is a fortunate "You think so?"
circumstance; yes, that really is lucky, for it never occurred
234

"Certainly."
"Very well, then."
"If they should hear of the separation" -"Ah, yes; what could I say?"

"Does your excellency wish for a receipt?" said the major, at
the same time slipping the money into the inner pocket of
his coat.
"For what?" said the count.

"I thought you might want it to show the Abbe Busoni."
"That an unfaithful tutor, bought over by the enemies of
"Well, when you receive the remaining 40,000, you shall give
your family" -me a receipt in full. Between honest men such excessive
"By the Corsinari?"
precaution is, I think, quite unnecessary."
"Precisely. Had stolen away this child, in order that your
name might become extinct."
"That is reasonable, since he is an only son."
"Well, now that all is arranged, do not let these newly
awakened remembrances be forgotten. You have, doubtless,
already guessed that I was preparing a surprise for you?"
"An agreeable one?" asked the Italian.
"Ah, I see the eye of a father is no more to be deceived than
his heart."
"Hum!" said the major.
"Some one has told you the secret; or, perhaps, you guessed
that he was here."
"That who was here?"
"Your child -- your son -- your Andrea!"
"I did guess it," replied the major with the greatest possible
coolness. "Then he is here?"
"He is," said Monte Cristo; "when the valet de chambre came
in just now, he told me of his arrival."

"Yes, so it is, between perfectly upright people."
"One word more," said Monte Cristo.
"Say on."
"You will permit me to make one remark?"
"Certainly; pray do so."
"Then I should advise you to leave off wearing that style of
dress."
"Indeed," said the major, regarding himself with an air of
complete satisfaction.
"Yes. It may be worn at Via Reggio; but that costume,
however elegant in itself, has long been out of fashion in
Paris."
"That's unfortunate."
"Oh, if you really are attached to your old mode of dress;
you can easily resume it when you leave Paris."
"But what shall I wear?"
"What you find in your trunks."

"In my trunks? I have but one portmanteau."
"Ah, very well, very well," said the major, clutching the
buttons of his coat at each exclamation.
"I dare say you have nothing else with you. What is the use
of boring one's self with so many things? Besides an old
"My dear sir," said Monte Cristo, "I understand your
soldier always likes to march with as little baggage as
emotion; you must have time to recover yourself. I will, in
possible."
the meantime, go and prepare the young man for this
much-desired interview, for I presume that he is not less "That is just the case -- precisely so."
impatient for it than yourself."
"But you are a man of foresight and prudence, therefore you
sent your luggage on before you. It has arrived at the Hotel
des Princes, Rue de Richelieu. It is there you are to take up
"I should quite imagine that to be the case," said Cavalcanti.
your quarters."
"Well, in a quarter of an hour he shall be with you."
"Then, in these trunks" -"You will bring him, then? You carry your goodness so far as
"I presume you have given orders to your valet de chambre
even to present him to me yourself?"
to put in all you are likely to need, -- your plain clothes and
"No; I do not wish to come between a father and son. Your your uniform. On grand occasions you must wear your
interview will be private. But do not be uneasy; even if the uniform; that will look very well. Do not forget your crosses.
powerful voice of nature should be silent, you cannot well They still laugh at them in France, and yet always wear them,
mistake him; he will enter by this door. He is a fine young for all that."
man, of fair complexion -- a little too fair, perhaps -- pleasing
"Very well, very well," said the major, who was in ecstasy at
in manners; but you will see and judge for yourself."
the attention paid him by the count.
"By the way," said the major, "you know I have only the
"Now," said Monte Cristo, "that you have fortified yourself
2,000 francs which the Abbe Busoni sent me; this sum I have
against all painful excitement, prepare yourself, my dear M.
expended upon travelling expenses, and" -Cavalcanti, to meet your lost Andrea." Saying which Monte
"And you want money; that is a matter of course, my dear M. Cristo bowed, and disappeared behind the tapestry, leaving
Cavalcanti. Well, here are 8,000 francs on account."
the major fascinated beyond expression with the delightful
reception which he had received at the hands of the count.
The major's eyes sparkled brilliantly.
"It is 40,000 francs which I now owe you," said Monte Cristo.

235


CHAPTER 56


Chapter 56

ANDREA CAVALCANTI

Andrea Cavalcanti

T

he Count of Monte Cristo entered the adjoining room,
which Baptistin had designated as the drawing-room,
and found there a young man, of graceful demeanor and
elegant appearance, who had arrived in a cab about half an
hour previously. Baptistin had not found any difficulty in
recognizing the person who presented himself at the door
for admittance. He was certainly the tall young man with
light hair, red heard, black eyes, and brilliant complexion,
whom his master had so particularly described to him.
When the count entered the room the young man was
carelessly stretched on a sofa, tapping his boot with the
gold-headed cane which he held in his hand. On perceiving
the count he rose quickly. "The Count of Monte Cristo, I
believe?" said he.
"Yes, sir, and I think I have the honor of addressing Count
Andrea Cavalcanti?"
"Count Andrea Cavalcanti," repeated the young man,
accompanying his words with a bow.
"You are charged with a letter of introduction addressed to
me, are you not?" said the count.
"I did not mention that, because the signature seemed to me
so strange."
"The letter signed `Sinbad the Sailor,' is it not?"

the young man's countenance; he had admired the assurance
of his look and the firmness of his voice; but at these words,
so natural in themselves, "Your father is indeed here, and is
seeking you," young Andrea started, and exclaimed, "My
father? Is my father here?"
"Most undoubtedly," replied Monte Cristo; "your father,
Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti." The expression of terror
which, for the moment, had overspread the features of the
young man, had now disappeared. "Ah, yes, that is the name,
certainly. Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti. And you really
mean to say; monsieur, that my dear father is here?"
"Yes, sir; and I can even add that I have only just left his
company. The history which he related to me of his lost son
touched me to the quick; indeed, his griefs, hopes, and fears
on that subject might furnish material for a most touching
and pathetic poem. At length, he one day received a letter,
stating that the abductors of his son now offered to restore
him, or at least to give notice where he might be found, on
condition of receiving a large sum of money, by way of
ransom. Your father did not hesitate an instant, and the sum
was sent to the frontier of Piedmont, with a passport signed
for Italy. You were in the south of France, I think?"
"Yes," replied Andrea, with an embarrassed air, "I was in the
south of France."

"Exactly so. Now, as I have never known any Sinbad, with "A carriage was to await you at Nice?"
the exception of the one celebrated in the `Thousand and
"Precisely so; and it conveyed me from Nice to Genoa, from
One Nights'" -Genoa to Turin, from Turin to Chambery, from Chambery to
"Well, it is one of his descendants, and a great friend of mine; Pont-de-Beauvoisin, and from Pont-de-Beauvoisin to Paris."
he is a very rich Englishman, eccentric almost to insanity,
"Indeed? Then your father ought to have met with you on
and his real name is Lord Wilmore."
the road, for it is exactly the same route which he himself
"Ah, indeed? Then that explains everything that is took, and that is how we have been able to trace your
extraordinary," said Andrea. "He is, then, the same journey to this place."
Englishman whom I met -- at -- ah -- yes, indeed. Well,
"But," said Andrea, "if my father had met me, I doubt if he
monsieur, I am at your service."
would have recognized me; I must be somewhat altered
"If what you say be true," replied the count, smiling, since he last saw me."
"perhaps you will be kind enough to give me some account
"Oh, the voice of nature," said Monte Cristo.
of yourself and your family?"
"True," interrupted the young man, "I had not looked upon it
"Certainly, I will do so," said the young man, with a
in that light."
quickness which gave proof of his ready invention. "I am (as
you have said) the Count Andrea Cavalcanti, son of Major "Now," replied Monte Cristo "there is only one source of
Bartolomeo Cavalcanti, a descendant of the Cavalcanti uneasiness left in your father's mind, which is this -- he is
whose names are inscribed in the golden book at Florence. anxious to know how you have been employed during your
Our family, although still rich (for my father's income long absence from him, how you have been treated by your
amounts to half a million), has experienced many persecutors, and if they have conducted themselves towards
misfortunes, and I myself was, at the age of five years, taken you with all the deference due to your rank. Finally, he is
away by the treachery of my tutor, so that for fifteen years I anxious to see if you have been fortunate enough to escape
have not seen the author of my existence. Since I have the bad moral influence to which you have been exposed,
arrived at years of discretion and become my own master, I and which is infinitely more to be dreaded than any physical
have been constantly seeking him, but all in vain. At length I suffering; he wishes to discover if the fine abilities with
received this letter from your friend, which states that my which nature had endowed you have been weakened by
father is in Paris, and authorizes me to address myself to you want of culture; and, in short, whether you consider yourself
for information respecting him."
capable of resuming and retaining in the world the high
position to which your rank entitles you."
"Really, all you have related to me is exceedingly
interesting," said Monte Cristo, observing the young man "Sir!" exclaimed the young man, quite astounded, "I hope no
with a gloomy satisfaction; "and you have done well to false report" -conform in everything to the wishes of my friend Sinbad; for
"As for myself, I first heard you spoken of by my friend
your father is indeed here, and is seeking you."
Wilmore, the philanthropist. I believe he found you in some
The count from the moment of first entering the unpleasant position, but do not know of what nature, for I
drawing-room, had not once lost sight of the expression of did not ask, not being inquisitive. Your misfortunes engaged
236

his sympathies, so you see you must have been interesting.
He told me that he was anxious to restore you to the position
which you had lost, and that he would seek your father until
he found him. He did seek, and has found him, apparently,
since he is here now; and, finally, my friend apprised me of
your coming, and gave me a few other instructions relative
to your future fortune. I am quite aware that my friend
Wilmore is peculiar, but he is sincere, and as rich as a
gold-mine, consequently, he may indulge his eccentricities
without any fear of their ruining him, and I have promised
to adhere to his instructions. Now, sir, pray do not be
offended at the question I am about to put to you, as it comes
in the way of my duty as your patron. I would wish to know
if the misfortunes which have happened to you -misfortunes entirely beyond your control, and which in no
degree diminish my regard for you -- I would wish to know
if they have not, in some measure, contributed to render you
a stranger to the world in which your fortune and your name
entitle you to make a conspicuous figure?"

of inclination to lead others to doubt them too; therefore, in
departing from this rule, I should (as the actors say) be
playing a part quite out of my line, and should, therefore,
run the risk of being hissed, which would be an act of folly."

"Sir," returned the young man, with a reassurance of manner,
"make your mind easy on this score. Those who took me
from my father, and who always intended, sooner or later, to
sell me again to my original proprietor, as they have now
done, calculated that, in order to make the most of their
bargain, it would be politic to leave me in possession of all
my personal and hereditary worth, and even to increase the
value, if possible. I have, therefore, received a very good
education, and have been treated by these kidnappers very
much as the slaves were treated in Asia Minor, whose
masters made them grammarians, doctors, and philosophers,
in order that they might fetch a higher price in the Roman
market." Monte Cristo smiled with satisfaction; it appeared
as if he had not expected so much from M. Andrea
Cavalcanti. "Besides," continued the young man, "if there did
appear some defect in education, or offence against the
established forms of etiquette, I suppose it would be excused,
in consideration of the misfortunes which accompanied my
birth, and followed me through my youth."

"Ah, sir, you have given me confidence; it is so long since we
were separated, that I have not the least remembrance of him,
and, besides, you know that in the eyes of the world a large
fortune covers all defects."

"Well," said Monte Cristo in an indifferent tone, "you will do
as you please, count, for you are the master of your own
actions, and are the person most concerned in the matter, but
if I were you, I would not divulge a word of these
adventures. Your history is quite a romance, and the world,
which delights in romances in yellow covers, strangely
mistrusts those which are bound in living parchment, even
though they be gilded like yourself. This is the kind of
difficulty which I wished to represent to you, my dear count.
You would hardly have recited your touching history before
it would go forth to the world, and be deemed unlikely and
unnatural. You would be no longer a lost child found, but
you would be looked upon as an upstart, who had sprung
up like a mushroom in the night. You might excite a little
curiosity, but it is not every one who likes to be made the
centre of observation and the subject of unpleasant remark."

"Shall I receive it from my father?" asked Andrea, with some
uneasiness.

"I agree with you, monsieur," said the young man, turning
pale, and, in spite of himself, trembling beneath the
scrutinizing look of his companion, "such consequences
would be extremely unpleasant."

"Therefore," said Monte Cristo feigning to mistake his
meaning -- "therefore I will not, for another instant, retard
the pleasure of your meeting. Are you prepared to embrace
your worthy father?"

"Nevertheless, you must not exaggerate the evil," said Monte
Cristo, "for by endeavoring to avoid one fault you will fall
into another. You must resolve upon one simple and single
line of conduct, and for a man of your intelligence, this plan
is as easy as it is necessary; you must form honorable
friendships, and by that means counteract the prejudice
which may attach to the obscurity of your former life."
Andrea visibly changed countenance. "I would offer myself
as your surety and friendly adviser," said Monte Cristo, "did
I not possess a moral distrust of my best friends, and a sort

"I hope you do not doubt it."

"However, your excellency," said Andrea, "in consideration
of Lord Wilmore, by whom I was recommended to you -- "
"Yes, certainly," interrupted Monte Cristo; "but Lord
Wilmore did not omit to inform me, my dear M. Andrea,
that the season of your youth was rather a stormy one. Ah,"
said the count, watching Andrea's countenance, "I do not
demand any confession from you; it is precisely to avoid that
necessity that your father was sent for from Lucca. You shall
soon see him. He is a little stiff and pompous in his manner,
and he is disfigured by his uniform; but when it becomes
known that he has been for eighteen years in the Austrian
service, all that will be pardoned. We are not generally very
severe with the Austrians. In short, you will find your father
a very presentable person, I assure you."

"He is a millionaire -- his income is 500,000 francs."
"Then," said the young man, with anxiety, "I shall be sure to
be placed in an agreeable position."
"One of the most agreeable possible, my dear sir; he will
allow you an income of 50,000 livres per annum during the
whole time of your stay in Paris."
"Then in that case I shall always choose to remain there."
"You cannot control circumstances, my dear sir; `man
proposes, and God disposes.'" Andrea sighed. "But," said he,
"so long as I do remain in Paris, and nothing forces me to
quit it, do you mean to tell me that I may rely on receiving
the sum you just now mentioned to me?"
"You may."

"Yes, you will receive it from your father personally, but
Lord Wilmore will be the security for the money. He has, at
the request of your father, opened an account of 6,000 francs
a month at M. Danglars', which is one of the safest banks in
Paris."
"And does my father mean to remain long in Paris?" asked
Andrea.
"Only a few days," replied Monte Cristo. "His service does
not allow him to absent himself more than two or three
weeks together."
"Ah, my dear father!" exclaimed Andrea, evidently charmed
with the idea of his speedy departure.

"Go, then, into the drawing-room, my young friend, where
you will find your father awaiting you." Andrea made a low
bow to the count, and entered the adjoining room. Monte
Cristo watched him till he disappeared, and then touched a
spring in a panel made to look like a picture, which, in
sliding partly from the frame, discovered to view a small
opening, so cleverly contrived that it revealed all that was
passing in the drawing-room now occupied by Cavalcanti
237


CHAPTER 56


ANDREA CAVALCANTI

and Andrea. The young man closed the door behind him,
and advanced towards the major, who had risen when he
heard steps approaching him. "Ah, my dear father!" said
Andrea in a loud voice, in order that the count might hear
him in the next room, "is it really you?"

shall ever deny my parent." The major looked anxiously
around him. "Make yourself easy, we are quite alone," said
Andrea; "besides, we are conversing in Italian."
"Well, then," replied the major, "they paid me 50,000 francs
down."

"How do you do, my dear son?" said the major gravely.

"Monsieur Cavalcanti," said Andrea, "do you believe in fairy
"After so many years of painful separation," said Andrea, in tales?"
the same tone of voice, and glancing towards the door, "what
"I used not to do so, but I really feel now almost obliged to
a happiness it is to meet again!"
have faith in them."
"Indeed it is, after so long a separation."
"You have, then, been induced to alter your opinion; you
"Will you not embrace me, sir?" said Andrea.
have had some proofs of their truth?" The major drew from
his pocket a handful of gold. "Most palpable proofs," said he,
"If you wish it, my son," said the major; and the two men
"as you may perceive."
embraced each other after the fashion of actors on the stage;
that is to say, each rested his head on the other's shoulder.
"You think, then, that I may rely on the count's promises?"
"Then we are once more reunited?" said Andrea.

"Certainly I do."

"Once more," replied the major.

"You are sure he will keep his word with me?"

"Never more to be separated?"

"To the letter, but at the same time, remember, we must
continue to play our respective parts. I, as a tender father" --

"Why, as to that -- I think, my dear son, you must be by this
time so accustomed to France as to look upon it almost as a "And I as a dutiful son, as they choose that I shall be
second country."
descended from you."
"The fact is," said the young man, "that I should be
exceedingly grieved to leave it."
"As for me, you must know I cannot possibly live out of
Lucca; therefore I shall return to Italy as soon as I can."
"But before you leave France, my dear father, I hope you will
put me in possession of the documents which will be
necessary to prove my descent."

"Whom do you mean by they?"
"Ma foi, I can hardly tell, but I was alluding to those who
wrote the letter; you received one, did you not?"
"Yes."
"From whom?"
"From a certain Abbe Busoni."

"Certainly; I am come expressly on that account; it has cost "Have you any knowledge of him?"
me much trouble to find you, but I had resolved on giving "No, I have never seen him."
them into your hands, and if I had to recommence my search,
"What did he say in the letter?"
it would occupy all the few remaining years of my life."
"You will promise not to betray me?"
"Where are these papers, then?"
"Here they are."
Andrea seized the certificate of his father's marriage and his
own baptismal register, and after having opened them with
all the eagerness which might be expected under the
circumstances, he read them with a facility which proved
that he was accustomed to similar documents, and with an
expression which plainly denoted an unusual interest in the
contents. When he had perused the documents, an
indefinable expression of pleasure lighted up his
countenance, and looking at the major with a most peculiar
smile, he said, in very excellent Tuscan, -- "Then there is no
longer any such thing, in Italy as being condemned to the
galleys?" The major drew himself up to his full height.

"Rest assured of that; you well know that our interests are
the same."
"Then read for yourself;" and the major gave a letter into the
young man's hand. Andrea read in a low voice --

"You are poor; a miserable old age awaits you. Would you
like to become rich, or at least independent? Set out
immediately for Paris, and demand of the Count of Monte
Cristo, Avenue des Champs Elysees, No. 30, the son whom
you had by the Marchesa Corsinari, and who was taken
from you at five years of age. This son is named Andrea
Cavalcanti. In order that you may not doubt the kind
intention of the writer of this letter, you will find enclosed an
order for 2,400 francs, payable in Florence, at Signor Gozzi's;
also a letter of introduction to the Count of Monte Cristo, on
"Why? -- what do you mean by that question?"
whom I give you a draft of 48,000 francs. Remember to go to
"I mean that if there were, it would be impossible to draw up the count on the 26th May at seven o'clock in the evening.
with impunity two such deeds as these. In France, my dear
sir, half such a piece of effrontery as that would cause you to (Signed)
be quickly despatched to Toulon for five years, for change of "Abbe Busoni."
air."
"It is the same."
"Will you be good enough to explain your meaning?" said
"What do you mean?" said the major.
the major, endeavoring as much as possible to assume an air
"I was going to say that I received a letter almost to the same
of the greatest majesty.
effect."
"My dear M. Cavalcanti," said Andrea, taking the major by
the arm in a confidential manner, "how much are you paid "You?"
for being my father?" The major was about to speak, when "Yes."
Andrea continued, in a low voice.
"From the Abbe Busoni?"
"Nonsense, I am going to set you an example of confidence,
they give me 50,000 francs a year to be your son; "No."
consequently, you can understand that it is not at all likely I "From whom, then?"
238

"From an Englishman, called Lord Wilmore, who takes the
name of Sinbad the Sailor."

"As for me, my heart is overflowing with happiness."

"You have seen him, then?"

"Ah, my dear M. Cavalcanti, I trust you will not leave before
I have had the honor of presenting you to some of my
friends."

"Happy father, happy son!" said the count.
"And of whom you have no more knowledge than I of the
"There is only one thing which grieves me," observed the
Abbe Busoni?"
major, "and that is the necessity for my leaving Paris so
"You are mistaken; there I am ahead of you."
soon."
"Yes, once."
"Where?"

"I am at your service, sir," replied the major.
"Ah, that is just what I cannot tell you; if I did, I should make
"Now, sir," said Monte Cristo, addressing Andrea, "make
you as wise as myself, which it is not my intention to do."
your confession."
"And what did the letter contain?"
"To whom?"
"Read it."
"Tell M. Cavalcanti something of the state of your finances."
"`You are poor, and your future prospects are dark and
"Ma foi, monsieur, you have touched upon a tender chord."
gloomy. Do you wish for a name? should you like to be rich,
and your own master?'"
"Do you hear what he says, major?"
"Ma foi," said the young man; "was it possible there could be
two answers to such a question?"
"Take the post-chaise which you will find waiting at the
Porte de Genes, as you enter Nice; pass through Turin,
Chambery, and Pont-de-Beauvoisin. Go to the Count of
Monte Cristo, Avenue des Champs Elysees, on the 26th of
May, at seven o'clock in the evening, and demand of him
your father. You are the son of the Marchese Cavalcanti and
the Marchesa Oliva Corsinari. The marquis will give you
some papers which will certify this fact, and authorize you
to appear under that name in the Parisian world. As to your
rank, an annual income of 50,000 livres will enable you to
support it admirably. I enclose a draft for 5,000 livres,
payable on M. Ferrea, banker at Nice, and also a letter of
introduction to the Count of Monte Cristo, whom I have
directed to supply all your wants.

"Certainly I do."
"But do you understand?"
"I do."
"Your son says he requires money."
"Well, what would you have me do?" said the major.
"You should furnish him with some of course," replied
Monte Cristo.
"I?"
"Yes, you," said the count, at the same time advancing
towards Andrea, and slipping a packet of bank-notes into
the young man's hand.
"What is this?"
"It is from your father."

"Sinbad the Sailor."

"From my father?"

"Humph," said the major; "very good. You have seen the
count, you say?"

"Yes; did you not tell him just now that you wanted money?
Well, then, he deputes me to give you this."

"I have only just left him "

"Am I to consider this as part of my income on account?"

"And has he conformed to all that the letter specified?"

"No, it is for the first expenses of your settling in Paris."

"He has."

"Ah, how good my dear father is!"

"Do you understand it?"

"Silence," said Monte Cristo; "he does not wish you to know
that it comes from him."

"Not in the least."
"There is a dupe somewhere."
"At all events, it is neither you nor I."
"Certainly not."
"Well, then" -"Why, it does not much concern us, do you think it does?"
"No; I agree with you there. We must play the game to the
end, and consent to be blindfold."

"I fully appreciate his delicacy," said Andrea, cramming the
notes hastily into his pocket.
"And now, gentlemen, I wish you good-morning," said
Monte Cristo.
"And when shall we have the honor of seeing you again,
your excellency?" asked Cavalcanti.
"Ah," said Andrea, "when may we hope for that pleasure?"

"On Saturday, if you will -- Yes. -- Let me see -- Saturday -- I
am to dine at my country house, at Auteuil, on that day, Rue
de la Fontaine, No. 28. Several persons are invited, and
"I never once doubted your doing so." Monte Cristo chose among others, M. Danglars, your banker. I will introduce
this moment for re-entering the drawing-room. On hearing you to him, for it will be necessary he should know you, as
the sound of his footsteps, the two men threw themselves in he is to pay your money."
each other's arms, and while they were in the midst of this "Full dress?" said the major, half aloud.
embrace, the count entered. "Well, marquis," said Monte
"Oh, yes, certainly," said the count; "uniform, cross,
Cristo, "you appear to be in no way disappointed in the son
knee-breeches."
whom your good fortune has restored to you."
"And how shall I be dressed?" demanded Andrea.
"Ah, your excellency, I am overwhelmed with delight."
"Oh, very simply; black trousers, patent leather boots, white
"And what are your feelings?" said Monte Cristo, turning to
waistcoat, either a black or blue coat, and a long cravat. Go
the young man.
239
"Ah, you shall see; I promise you I will sustain my part to
admiration."


CHAPTER 56


ANDREA CAVALCANTI

to Blin or Veronique for your clothes. Baptistin will tell you
where, if you do not know their address. The less pretension
there is in your attire, the better will be the effect, as you are
a rich man. If you mean to buy any horses, get them of
Devedeux, and if you purchase a phaeton, go to Baptiste for
it."
"At what hour shall we come?" asked the young man.
"About half-past six."

240

"We will be with you at that time," said the major. The two
Cavalcanti bowed to the count, and left the house. Monte
Cristo went to the window, and saw them crossing the street,
arm in arm. "There go two miscreants;" said he, "it is a pity
they are not really related!" -- then, after an instant of gloomy
reflection, "Come, I will go to see the Morrels," said he; "I
think that disgust is even more sickening than hatred."


Chapter 57

O

In The Lucerne Patch

ur readers must now allow us to transport them again
to the enclosure surrounding M. de Villefort's house,
and, behind the gate, half screened from view by the large
chestnut-trees, which on all sides spread their luxuriant
branches, we shall find some people of our acquaintance.
This time Maximilian was the first to arrive. He was intently
watching for a shadow to appear among the trees, and
awaiting with anxiety the sound of a light step on the gravel
walk. At length, the long-desired sound was heard, and
instead of one figure, as he had expected, he perceived that
two were approaching him. The delay had been occasioned
by a visit from Madame Danglars and Eugenie, which had
been prolonged beyond the time at which Valentine was
expected. That she might not appear to fail in her promise to
Maximilian, she proposed to Mademoiselle Danglars that
they should take a walk in the garden, being anxious to
show that the delay, which was doubtless a cause of
vexation to him, was not occasioned by any neglect on her
part. The young man, with the intuitive perception of a lover,
quickly understood the circumstances in which she was
involuntarily placed, and he was comforted. Besides,
although she avoided coming within speaking distance,
Valentine arranged so that Maximilian could see her pass
and repass, and each time she went by, she managed,
unperceived by her companion, to cast an expressive look at
the young man, which seemed to say, "Have patience! You
see it is not my fault." And Maximilian was patient, and
employed himself in mentally contrasting the two girls, -one fair, with soft languishing eyes, a figure gracefully
bending like a weeping willow; the other a brunette, with a
fierce and haughty expression, and as straight as a poplar. It
is unnecessary to state that, in the eyes of the young man,
Valentine did not suffer by the contrast. In about half an
hour the girls went away, and Maximilian understood that
Mademoiselle Danglars' visit had at last come to an end. In a
few minutes Valentine re-entered the garden alone. For fear
that any one should be observing her return, she walked
slowly; and instead of immediately directing her steps
towards the gate, she seated herself on a bench, and,
carefully casting her eyes around, to convince herself that
she was not watched, she presently arose, and proceeded
quickly to join Maximilian.

man whom I could not love, my thoughts involuntarily
reverted to him on whom my affections were fixed."
"Ah, how good you are to say so, Valentine! You possess a
quality which can never belong to Mademoiselle Danglars. It
is that indefinable charm which is to a woman what perfume
is to the flower and flavor to the fruit, for the beauty of either
is not the only quality we seek."
"It is your love which makes you look upon everything in
that light."
"No, Valentine, I assure you such is not the case. I was
observing you both when you were walking in the garden,
and, on my honor, without at all wishing to depreciate the
beauty of Mademoiselle Danglars, I cannot understand how
any man can really love her."
"The fact is, Maximilian, that I was there, and my presence
had the effect of rendering you unjust in your comparison."
"No; but tell me -- it is a question of simple curiosity, and
which was suggested by certain ideas passing in my mind
relative to Mademoiselle Danglars" -"I dare say it is something disparaging which you are going
to say. It only proves how little indulgence we may expect
from your sex," interrupted Valentine.
"You cannot, at least, deny that you are very harsh judges of
each other."
"If we are so, it is because we generally judge under the
influence of excitement. But return to your question."
"Does Mademoiselle Danglars object to this marriage with M.
de Morcerf on account of loving another?"
"I told you I was not on terms of strict intimacy with
Eugenie."
"Yes, but girls tell each other secrets without being
particularly intimate; own, now, that you did question her
on the subject. Ah, I see you are smiling."
"If you are already aware of the conversation that passed, the
wooden partition which interposed between us and you has
proved but a slight security."
"Come, what did she say?"

"Good-evening, Valentine," said a well-known voice.

"She told me that she loved no one," said Valentine; "that she
"Good-evening, Maximilian; I know I have kept you waiting, disliked the idea of being married; that she would infinitely
but you saw the cause of my delay."
prefer leading an independent and unfettered life; and that
she almost wished her father might lose his fortune, that she
"Yes, I recognized Mademoiselle Danglars. I was not aware
might become an artist, like her friend, Mademoiselle Louise
that you were so intimate with her."
d'Armilly."
"Who told you we were intimate, Maximilian?"
"Ah, you see" -"No one, but you appeared to be so. From the manner in
"Well, what does that prove?" asked Valentine.
which you walked and talked together, one would have
thought you were two school-girls telling your secrets to "Nothing," replied Maximilian.
each other."
"Then why did you smile?"
"We were having a confidential conversation," returned
"Why, you know very well that you are reflecting on
Valentine; "she was owning to me her repugnance to the
yourself, Valentine."
marriage with M. de Morcerf; and I, on the other hand, was
confessing to her how wretched it made me to think of "Do you want me to go away?"
marrying M. d'Epinay."
"Ah, no, no. But do not let us lose time; you are the subject
"Dear Valentine!"

on which I wish to speak."

"That will account to you for the unreserved manner which "True, we must be quick, for we have scarcely ten minutes
you observed between me and Eugenie, as in speaking of the
241


CHAPTER 57


IN THE LUCERNE PATCH

more to pass together."

form no idea of the expression of that old man's eye when he
looks at me, the only person in the world whom he loves,
"Ma foi," said Maximilian, in consternation.
and, I had almost said, by whom he is beloved in return.
"Yes, you are right; I am but a poor friend to you. What a life When he learned my resolution, I shall never forget the
I cause you to lead, poor Maximilian, you who are formed reproachful look which he cast on me, and the tears of utter
for happiness! I bitterly reproach myself, I assure you."
despair which chased each other down his lifeless cheeks.
"Well, what does it signify, Valentine, so long as I am Ah, Maximilian, I experienced, at that moment, such
satisfied, and feel that even this long and painful suspense is remorse for my intention, that, throwing myself at his feet, I
amply repaid by five minutes of your society, or two words exclaimed, -- `Forgive me, pray forgive me, my dear
from your lips? And I have also a deep conviction that grandfather; they may do what they will with me, I will
heaven would not have created two hearts, harmonizing as never leave you.' When I had ceased speaking, he thankfully
ours do, and almost miraculously brought us together, to raised his eyes to heaven, but without uttering a word. Ah,
Maximilian, I may have much to suffer, but I feel as if my
separate us at last."
grandfather's look at that moment would more than
"Those are kind and cheering words. You must hope for us compensate for all."
both, Maximilian; that will make me at least partly happy."
"Dear Valentine, you are a perfect angel, and I am sure I do
"But why must you leave me so soon?"
not know what I -- sabring right and left among the
"I do not know particulars. I can only tell you that Madame Bedouins -- can have done to merit your being revealed to
de Villefort sent to request my presence, as she had a me, unless, indeed, heaven took into consideration the fact
communication to make on which a part of my fortune that the victims of my sword were infidels. But tell me what
depended. Let them take my fortune, I am already too rich; interest Madame de Villefort can have in your remaining
and, perhaps, when they have taken it, they will leave me in unmarried?"
peace and quietness. You would love me as much if I were "Did I not tell you just now that I was rich, Maximilian -- too
poor, would you not, Maximilian?"
rich? I possess nearly 50,000 livres in right of my mother; my
"Oh, I shall always love you. What should I care for either
riches or poverty, if my Valentine was near me, and I felt
certain that no one could deprive me of her? But do you not
fear that this communication may relate to your marriage?"
"I do not think that is the case."
"However it may be, Valentine, you must not be alarmed. I
assure you that, as long as I live, I shall never love any one
else!"
"You think to reassure me when you say that, Maximilian."
"Pardon me, you are right. I am a brute. But I was going to
tell you that I met M. de Morcerf the other day."
"Well?"
"Monsieur Franz is his friend, you know."
"What then?"
"Monsieur de Morcerf has received a letter from Franz,
announcing his immediate return." Valentine turned pale,
and leaned her hand against the gate. "Ah heavens, if it were
that! But no, the communication would not come through
Madame de Villefort."

grandfather and my grandmother, the Marquis and
Marquise de Saint-Meran, will leave me as much, and M.
Noirtier evidently intends making me his heir. My brother
Edward, who inherits nothing from his mother, will,
therefore, be poor in comparison with me. Now, if I had
taken the veil, all this fortune would have descended to my
father, and, in reversion, to his son."
"Ah, how strange it seems that such a young and beautiful
woman should be so avaricious."
"It is not for herself that she is so, but for her son, and what
you regard as a vice becomes almost a virtue when looked at
in the light of maternal love."
"But could you not compromise matters, and give up a
portion of your fortune to her son?"
"How could I make such a proposition, especially to a
woman who always professes to be so entirely
disinterested?"

"Valentine, I have always regarded our love in the light of
something sacred; consequently, I have covered it with the
veil of respect, and hid it in the innermost recesses of my
soul. No human being, not even my sister, is aware of its
"Why not?"
existence. Valentine, will you permit me to make a confidant
"Because -- I scarcely know why -- but it has appeared as if of a friend and reveal to him the love I bear you?"
Madame de Villefort secretly objected to the marriage, Valentine started. "A friend, Maximilian; and who is this
although she did not choose openly to oppose it."
friend? I tremble to give my permission."
"Is it so? Then I feel as if I could adore Madame de Villefort."
"Do not be in such a hurry to do that," said Valentine, with a
sad smile.
"If she objects to your marrying M. d'Epinay, she would be
all the more likely to listen to any other proposition."
"No, Maximilian, it is not suitors to which Madame de
Villefort objects, it is marriage itself."
"Marriage? If she dislikes that so much, why did she ever
marry herself?"
"You do not understand me, Maximilian. About a year ago, I
talked of retiring to a convent. Madame de Villefort, in spite
of all the remarks which she considered it her duty to make,
secretly approved of the proposition, my father consented to
it at her instigation, and it was only on account of my poor
grandfather that I finally abandoned the project. You can
242

"Listen, Valentine. Have you never experienced for any one
that sudden and irresistible sympathy which made you feel
as if the object of it had been your old and familiar friend,
though, in reality, it was the first time you had ever met?
Nay, further, have you never endeavored to recall the time,
place, and circumstances of your former intercourse, and
failing in this attempt, have almost believed that your spirits
must have held converse with each other in some state of
being anterior to the present, and that you are only now
occupied in a reminiscence of the past?"
"Yes."
"Well, that is precisely the feeling which I experienced when
I first saw that extraordinary man."
"Extraordinary, did you say?"
"Yes."

"You have known him for some time, then?"
"Scarcely longer than eight or ten days."

loves you, Maximilian; how do you know that he does? All
would pay deference to an officer like you, with a fierce
mustache and a long sabre, but they think they may crush a
poor weeping girl with impunity."

"And do you call a man your friend whom you have only
known for eight or ten days? Ah, Maximilian, I had hoped
"Ah, Valentine, I assure you you are mistaken."
you set a higher value on the title of friend."
"If it were otherwise -- if he treated me diplomatically -- that
"Your logic is most powerful, Valentine, but say what you
is to say, like a man who wishes, by some means or other, to
will, I can never renounce the sentiment which has
obtain a footing in the house, so that he may ultimately gain
instinctively taken possession of my mind. I feel as if it were
the power of dictating to its occupants -- he would, if it had
ordained that this man should be associated with all the
been but once, have honored me with the smile which you
good which the future may have in store for me, and
extol so loudly; but no, he saw that I was unhappy, he
sometimes it really seems as if his eye was able to see what
understood that I could be of no use to him, and therefore
was to come, and his hand endowed with the power of
paid no attention to me whatever. Who knows but that, in
directing events according to his own will."
order to please Madame de Villefort and my father, he may
"He must be a prophet, then," said Valentine, smiling.
not persecute me by every means in his power? It is not just
"Indeed," said Maximilian, "I have often been almost that he should despise me so, without any reason. Ah,
tempted to attribute to him the gift of prophecy; at all events, forgive me," said Valentine, perceiving the effect which her
words were producing on Maximilian: "I have done wrong,
he has a wonderful power of foretelling any future good."
for I have given utterance to thoughts concerning that man
"Ah," said Valentine in a mournful tone, "do let me see this which I did not even know existed in my heart. I do not deny
man, Maximilian; he may tell me whether I shall ever be the influence of which you speak, or that I have not myself
loved sufficiently to make amends for all I have suffered."
experienced it, but with me it has been productive of evil
rather than good."
"My poor girl, you know him already."
"I know him?"
"Yes; it was he who saved the life of your step-mother and
her son."

"Well, Valentine," said Morrel with a sigh, "we will not
discuss the matter further. I will not make a confidant of
him."

"Alas," said Valentine, "I see that I have given you pain. I can
only say how sincerely I ask pardon for having griefed you.
"The same."
But, indeed, I am not prejudiced beyond the power of
"Ah," cried Valentine, "he is too much the friend of Madame conviction. Tell me what this Count of Monte Cristo has
done for you."
de Villefort ever to be mine."
"The friend of Madame de Villefort! It cannot be; surely, "I own that your question embarrasses me, Valentine, for I
cannot say that the count has rendered me any ostensible
Valentine, you are mistaken?"
service. Still, as I have already told you I have an instinctive
"No, indeed, I am not; for I assure you, his power over our affection for him, the source of which I cannot explain to you.
household is almost unlimited. Courted by my step-mother, Has the sun done anything for me? No; he warms me with
who regards him as the epitome of human wisdom; admired his rays, and it is by his light that I see you -- nothing more.
by my father, who says he has never before heard such Has such and such a perfume done anything for me? No; its
sublime ideas so eloquently expressed; idolized by Edward, odor charms one of my senses -- that is all I can say when I
who, notwithstanding his fear of the count's large black eyes, am asked why I praise it. My friendship for him is as strange
runs to meet him the moment he arrives, and opens his hand, and unaccountable as his for me. A secret voice seems to
in which he is sure to find some delightful present, -- M. de whisper to me that there must be something more than
Monte Cristo appears to exert a mysterious and almost chance in this unexpected reciprocity of friendship. In his
uncontrollable influence over all the members of our family." most simple actions, as well as in his most secret thoughts, I
"If such be the case, my dear Valentine, you must yourself find a relation to my own. You will perhaps smile at me
have felt, or at all events will soon feel, the effects of his when I tell you that, ever since I have known this man, I
presence. He meets Albert de Morcerf in Italy -- it is to have involuntarily entertained the idea that all the good
rescue him from the hands of the banditti; he introduces fortune which his befallen me originated from him. However,
himself to Madame Danglars -- it is that he may give her a I have managed to live thirty years without this protection,
royal present; your step-mother and her son pass before his you will say; but I will endeavor a little to illustrate my
door -- it is that his Nubian may save them from destruction. meaning. He invited me to dine with him on Saturday,
This man evidently possesses the power of influencing which was a very natural thing for him to do. Well, what
events, both as regards men and things. I never saw more have I learned since? That your mother and M. de Villefort
simple tastes united to greater magnificence. His smile is so are both coming to this dinner. I shall meet them there, and
sweet when he addresses me, that I forget it ever can be who knows what future advantages may result from the
bitter to others. Ah, Valentine, tell me, if he ever looked on interview? This may appear to you to be no unusual
you with one of those sweet smiles? if so, depend on it, you combination of circumstances; nevertheless, I perceive some
hidden plot in the arrangement -- something, in fact, more
will be happy."
than is apparent on a casual view of the subject. I believe that
"Me?" said the young girl, "he never even glances at me; on
this singular man, who appears to fathom the motives of
the contrary, if I accidentally cross his path, he appears
every one, has purposely arranged for me to meet M. and
rather to avoid me. Ah, he is not generous, neither does he
Madame de Villefort, and sometimes, I confess, I have gone
possess that supernatural penetration which you attribute to
so far as to try to read in his eyes whether he was in
him, for if he did, he would have perceived that I was
possession of the secret of our love."
unhappy; and if he had been generous, seeing me sad and
solitary, he would have used his influence to my advantage, "My good friend," said Valentine, "I should take you for a
and since, as you say, he resembles the sun, he would have visionary, and should tremble for your reason, if I were
warmed my heart with one of his life-giving rays. You say he always to hear you talk in a strain similar to this. Is it
243
"The Count of Monte Cristo?"


CHAPTER 57


IN THE LUCERNE PATCH

possible that you can see anything more than the merest
chance in this meeting? Pray reflect a little. My father, who
never goes out, has several times been on the point of
refusing this invitation; Madame de Villefort, on the contrary,
is burning with the desire of seeing this extraordinary nabob
in his own house, therefore, she has with great difficulty
prevailed on my father to accompany her. No, no; it is as I
have said, Maximilian, -- there is no one in the world of
whom I can ask help but yourself and my grandfather, who
is little better than a corpse."

had rubbed his head against me and, when I mounted him,
had pranced in the most delightful way imaginable, so that I
was altogether fascinated with him. The same evening some
friends of mine visited me, -- M. de Chateau-Renaud, M.
Debray, and five or six other choice spirits, whom you do
not know, even by name. They proposed a game of
bouillotte. I never play, for I am not rich enough to afford to
lose, or sufficiently poor to desire to gain. But I was at my
own house, you understand, so there was nothing to be done
but to send for the cards, which I did.

"I see that you are right, logically speaking," said Maximilian; "Just as they were sitting down to table, M. de Monte Cristo
"but the gentle voice which usually has such power over me arrived. He took his seat amongst them; they played, and I
fails to convince me to-day."
won. I am almost ashamed to say that my gains amounted to
5,000 francs. We separated at midnight. I could not defer my
"I feel the same as regards yourself." said Valentine; "and I
pleasure, so I took a cabriolet and drove to the horse dealer's.
own that, if you have no stronger proof to give me" -Feverish and excited, I rang at the door. The person who
"I have another," replied Maximilian; "but I fear you will opened it must have taken me for a madman, for I rushed at
deem it even more absurd than the first."
once to the stable. Medeah was standing at the rack, eating
his hay. I immediately put on the saddle and bridle, to which
"So much the worse," said Valentine, smiling.
operation he lent himself with the best grace possible; then,
"It is, nevertheless, conclusive to my mind. My ten years of putting the 4,500 francs into the hands of the astonished
service have also confirmed my ideas on the subject of dealer, I proceeded to fulfil my intention of passing the night
sudden inspirations, for I have several times owed my life to in riding in the Champs Elysees. As I rode by the count's
a mysterious impulse which directed me to move at once house I perceived a light in one of the windows, and fancied
either to the right or to the left, in order to escape the ball I saw the shadow of his figure moving behind the curtain.
which killed the comrade fighting by my side, while it left Now, Valentine, I firmly believe that he knew of my wish to
me unharmed."
possess this horse, and that he lost expressly to give me the
"Dear Maximilian, why not attribute your escape to my means of procuring him."
constant prayers for your safety? When you are away, I no "My dear Maximilian, you are really too fanciful; you will
longer pray for myself, but for you."
not love even me long. A man who accustoms himself to live
"Yes, since you have known me," said Morrel, smiling; "but
that cannot apply to the time previous to our acquaintance,
Valentine."

in such a world of poetry and imagination must find far too
little excitement in a common, every-day sort of attachment
such as ours. But they are calling me. Do you hear?"

"You are very provoking, and will not give me credit for "Ah, Valentine," said Maximilian, "give me but one finger
anything; but let me hear this second proof, which you through this opening in the grating, one finger, the littlest
finger of all, that I may have the happiness of kissing it."
yourself own to be absurd."
"Well, look through this opening, and you will see the
beautiful new horse which I rode here."

"Maximilian, we said we would be to each other as two
voices, two shadows."

"Ah, what a beautiful creature!" cried Valentine; "why did
you not bring him close to the gate, so that I could talk to
him and pat him?"

"As you will, Valentine."

"He is, as you see, a very valuable animal," said Maximilian.
"You know that my means are limited, and that I am what
would be designated a man of moderate pretensions. Well, I
went to a horse dealer's, where I saw this magnificent horse,
which I have named Medeah. I asked the price; they told me
it was 4,500 francs. I was, therefore, obliged to give it up, as
you may imagine, but I own I went away with rather a
heavy heart, for the horse had looked at me affectionately,

244

"Shall you be happy if I do what you wish?"
"Oh, yes!" Valentine mounted on a bench, and passed not
only her finger but her whole hand through the opening.
Maximilian uttered a cry of delight, and, springing forwards,
seized the hand extended towards him, and imprinted on it
a fervent and impassioned kiss. The little hand was then
immediately withdrawn, and the young man saw Valentine
hurrying towards the house, as though she were almost
terrified at her own sensations.


Chapter 58

W

M. Noirtier De Villefort

e will now relate what was passing in the house of the
king's attorney after the departure of Madame
Danglars and her daughter, and during the time of the
conversation between Maximilian and Valentine, which we
have just detailed. M. de Villefort entered his father's room,
followed by Madame de Villefort. Both of the visitors, after
saluting the old man and speaking to Barrois, a faithful
servant, who had been twenty-five years in his service, took
their places on either side of the paralytic.

easily to understand his thoughts, and to convey her own in
return, and, through her untiring and devoted assiduity, it
was seldom that, in the ordinary transactions of every-day
life, she failed to anticipate the wishes of the living, thinking
mind, or the wants of the almost inanimate body. As to the
servant, he had, as we have said, been with his master for
five and twenty years, therefore he knew all his habits, and it
was seldom that Noirtier found it necessary to ask for
anything, so prompt was he in administering to all the
necessities of the invalid. Villefort did not need the help of
M. Noirtier was sitting in an arm-chair, which moved upon
either Valentine or the domestic in order to carry on with his
casters, in which he was wheeled into the room in the
father the strange conversation which he was about to begin.
morning, and in the same way drawn out again at night. He
As we have said, he perfectly understood the old man's
was placed before a large glass, which reflected the whole
vocabulary, and if he did not use it more often, it was only
apartment, and so, without any attempt to move, which
indifference and ennui which prevented him from so doing.
would have been impossible, he could see all who entered
He therefore allowed Valentine to go into the garden, sent
the room and everything which was going on around him.
away Barrois, and after having seated himself at his father's
M. Noirtier, although almost as immovable as a corpse,
right hand, while Madame de Villefort placed herself on the
looked at the newcomers with a quick and intelligent
left, he addressed him thus: -expression, perceiving at once, by their ceremonious
courtesy, that they were come on business of an unexpected "I trust you will not be displeased, sir, that Valentine has not
and official character. Sight and hearing were the only senses come with us, or that I dismissed Barrois, for our conference
remaining, and they, like two solitary sparks, remained to will be one which could not with propriety be carried on in
animate the miserable body which seemed fit for nothing but the presence of either. Madame de Villefort and I have a
the grave; it was only, however, by means of one of these communication to make to you."
senses that he could reveal the thoughts and feelings that
Noirtier's face remained perfectly passive during this long
still occupied his mind, and the look by which he gave
preamble, while, on the contrary, Villefort's eye was
expression to his inner life was like the distant gleam of a
endeavoring to penetrate into the inmost recesses of the old
candle which a traveller sees by night across some desert
man's heart.
place, and knows that a living being dwells beyond the
silence and obscurity. Noirtier's hair was long and white, "This communication," continued the procureur, in that cold
and flowed over his shoulders; while in his eyes, shaded by and decisive tone which seemed at once to preclude all
thick black lashes, was concentrated, as it often happens discussion, "will, we are sure, meet with your approbation."
with an organ which is used to the exclusion of the others, all The eye of the invalid still retained that vacancy of
the activity, address, force, and intelligence which were expression which prevented his son from obtaining any
formerly diffused over his whole body; and so although the knowledge of the feelings which were passing in his mind;
movement of the arm, the sound of the voice, and the agility he listened, nothing more. "Sir," resumed Villefort, "we are
of the body, were wanting, the speaking eye sufficed for all. thinking of marrying Valentine." Had the old man's face
He commanded with it; it was the medium through which been moulded in wax it could not have shown less emotion
his thanks were conveyed. In short, his whole appearance at this news than was now to be traced there. "The marriage
produced on the mind the impression of a corpse with living will take place in less than three months," said Villefort.
eyes, and nothing could be more startling than to observe Noirtier's eye still retained its inanimate expression.
the expression of anger or joy suddenly lighting up these Madame de Villefort now took her part in the conversation
organs, while the rest of the rigid and marble-like features and added, -- "We thought this news would possess an
were utterly deprived of the power of participation. Three interest for you, sir, who have always entertained a great
persons only could understand this language of the poor affection for Valentine; it therefore only now remains for us
paralytic; these were Villefort, Valentine, and the old servant to tell you the name of the young man for whom she is
of whom we have already spoken. But as Villefort saw his destined. It is one of the most desirable connections which
father but seldom, and then only when absolutely obliged, could possibly be formed; he possesses fortune, a high rank
and as he never took any pains to please or gratify him when in society, and every personal qualification likely to render
he was there, all the old man's happiness was centred in his Valentine supremely happy, -- his name, moreover, cannot
granddaughter. Valentine, by means of her love, her patience, be wholly unknown to you. It is M. Franz de Quesnel, Baron
and her devotion, had learned to read in Noirtier's look all d'Epinay."
the varied feelings which were passing in his mind. To this
dumb language, which was so unintelligible to others, she While his wife was speaking, Villefort had narrowly
answered by throwing her whole soul into the expression of watched the old man's countenance. When Madame de
her countenance, and in this manner were the conversations Villefort pronounced the name of Franz, the pupil of M.
sustained between the blooming girl and the helpless invalid, Noirtier's eye began to dilate, and his eyelids trembled with
whose body could scarcely be called a living one, but who, the same movement that may be perceived on the lips of an
nevertheless, possessed a fund of knowledge and individual about to speak, and he darted a lightning glance
penetration, united with a will as powerful as ever although at Madame de Villefort and his son. The procureur, who
clogged by a body rendered utterly incapable of obeying its knew the political hatred which had formerly existed
impulses. Valentine had solved the problem, and was able between M. Noirtier and the elder d'Epinay, well understood
the agitation and anger which the announcement had
245


CHAPTER 58


M. NOIRTIER DE VILLEFORT

produced; but, feigning not to perceive either, he
immediately resumed the narrative begun by his wife. "Sir,"
said he, "you are aware that Valentine is about to enter her
nineteenth year, which renders it important that she should
lose no time in forming a suitable alliance. Nevertheless, you
have not been forgotten in our plans, and we have fully
ascertained beforehand that Valentine's future husband will
consent, not to live in this house, for that might not be
pleasant for the young people, but that you should live with
them; so that you and Valentine, who are so attached to each
other, would not be separated, and you would be able to
pursue exactly the same course of life which you have
hitherto done, and thus, instead of losing, you will be a
gainer by the change, as it will secure to you two children
instead of one, to watch over and comfort you."
Noirtier's look was furious; it was very evident that
something desperate was passing in the old man's mind, for
a cry of anger and grief rose in his throat, and not being able
to find vent in utterance, appeared almost to choke him, for
his face and lips turned quite purple with the struggle.
Villefort quietly opened a window, saying, "It is very warm,
and the heat affects M. Noirtier." He then returned to his
place, but did not sit down. "This marriage," added Madame
de Villefort, "is quite agreeable to the wishes of M. d'Epinay
and his family; besides, he had no relations nearer than an
uncle and aunt, his mother having died at his birth, and his
father having been assassinated in 1815, that is to say, when
he was but two years old; it naturally followed that the child
was permitted to choose his own pursuits, and he has,
therefore, seldom acknowledged any other authority but that
of his own will."
"That assassination was a mysterious affair," said Villefort,
"and the perpetrators have hitherto escaped detection,
although suspicion has fallen on the head of more than one
person." Noirtier made such an effort that his lips expanded
into a smile.

suffering, and that there was much on his mind which he
was wishing to communicate to her. "Dear grandpapa," cried
she, "what has happened? They have vexed you, and you are
angry?" The paralytic closed his eyes in token of assent.
"Who has displeased you? Is it my father?"
"No."
"Madame de Villefort?"
"No."
"Me?" The former sign was repeated. "Are you displeased
with me?" cried Valentine in astonishment. M. Noirtier again
closed his eyes. "And what have I done, dear grandpapa,
that you should be angry with me?" cried Valentine.
There was no answer, and she continued. "I have not seen
you all day. Has any one been speaking to you against me?"
"Yes," said the old man's look, with eagerness.
"Let me think a moment. I do assure you, grandpapa -- Ah -M. and Madame de Villefort have just left this room, have
they not?"
"Yes."
"And it was they who told you something which made you
angry? What was it then? May I go and ask them, that I may
have the opportunity of making my peace with you?"
"No, no," said Noirtier's look.
"Ah, you frighten me. What can they have said?" and she
again tried to think what it could be.
"Ah, I know," said she, lowering her voice and going close to
the old man. "They have been speaking of my marriage, -have they not?"
"Yes," replied the angry look.

"I understand; you are displeased at the silence I have
preserved on the subject. The reason of it was, that they had
insisted on my keeping the matter a secret, and begged me
"Now," continued Villefort, "those to whom the guilt really
not to tell you anything of it. They did not even acquaint me
belongs, by whom the crime was committed, on whose
with their intentions, and I only discovered them by chance,
heads the justice of man may probably descend here, and the
that is why I have been so reserved with you, dear
certain judgment of God hereafter, would rejoice in the
grandpapa. Pray forgive me." But there was no look
opportunity thus afforded of bestowing such a
calculated to reassure her; all it seemed to say was, "It is not
peace-offering as Valentine on the son of him whose life they
only your reserve which afflicts me."
so ruthlessly destroyed." Noirtier had succeeded in
mastering his emotion more than could have been deemed "What is it, then?" asked the young girl. "Perhaps you think I
possible with such an enfeebled and shattered frame. "Yes, I shall abandon you, dear grandpapa, and that I shall forget
understand," was the reply contained in his look; and this you when I am married?"
look expressed a feeling of strong indignation, mixed with
"No."
profound contempt. Villefort fully understood his father's
meaning, and answered by a slight shrug of his shoulders. "They told you, then, that M. d'Epinay consented to our all
He then motioned to his wife to take leave. "Now sir," said living together?"
Madame de Villefort, "I must bid you farewell. Would you "Yes."
like me to send Edward to you for a short time?"
"Then why are you still vexed and grieved?" The old man's
It had been agreed that the old man should express his eyes beamed with an expression of gentle affection. "Yes, I
approbation by closing his eyes, his refusal by winking them understand," said Valentine; "it is because you love me." The
several times, and if he had some desire or feeling to express, old man assented. "And you are afraid I shall be unhappy?"
he raised them to heaven. If he wanted Valentine, he closed
his right eye only, and if Barrois, the left. At Madame de "Yes."
Villefort's proposition he instantly winked his eyes. "You do not like M. Franz?" The eyes repeated several times,
Provoked by a complete refusal, she bit her lip and said, "No, no, no."
"Then shall I send Valentine to you?" The old man closed his
"Then you are vexed with the engagement?"
eyes eagerly, thereby intimating that such was his wish. M.
and Madame de Villefort bowed and left the room, giving "Yes."
orders that Valentine should be summoned to her "Well, listen," said Valentine, throwing herself on her knees,
grandfather's presence, and feeling sure that she would have and putting her arm round her grandfather's neck, "I am
much to do to restore calmness to the perturbed spirit of the vexed, too, for I do not love M. Franz d'Epinay." An
invalid. Valentine, with a color still heightened by emotion, expression of intense joy illumined the old man's eyes.
entered the room just after her parents had quitted it. One "When I wished to retire into a convent, you remember how
look was sufficient to tell her that her grandfather was
246

angry you were with me?" A tear trembled in the eye of the
invalid. "Well," continued Valentine, "the reason of my
proposing it was that I might escape this hateful marriage,
which drives me to despair." Noirtier's breathing came thick
and short. "Then the idea of this marriage really grieves you
too? Ah, if you could but help me -- if we could both
together defeat their plan! But you are unable to oppose
them, -- you, whose mind is so quick, and whose will is so
firm are nevertheless, as weak and unequal to the contest as I
am myself. Alas, you, who would have been such a powerful
protector to me in the days of your health and strength, can
now only sympathize in my joys and sorrows, without being
able to take any active part in them. However, this is much,
and calls for gratitude and heaven has not taken away all my
blessings when it leaves me your sympathy and kindness."

Valentine.

At these words there appeared in Noirtier's eye an
expression of such deep meaning that the young girl thought
she could read these words there: "You are mistaken; I can
still do much for you."

"Yes."

"Do you think you can help me, dear grandpapa?" said
Valentine.

"Yes."
"Shall my father be informed of your wish?"
"Yes."
"Do you wish the notary to be sent for immediately?"
"Yes."
"Then they shall go for him directly, dear grandpapa. Is that
all you want?"
"Yes." Valentine rang the bell, and ordered the servant to tell
Monsieur or Madame de Villefort that they were requested
to come to M. Noirtier's room. "Are you satisfied now?"
inquired Valentine.
"I am sure you are; it is not very difficult to discover that," -and the young girl smiled on her grandfather, as if he had
been a child. M. de Villefort entered, followed by Barrois.
"What do you want me for, sir?" demanded he of the
paralytic.

"Sir," said Valentine, "my grandfather wishes for a notary."
At this strange and unexpected demand M. de Villefort and
his father exchanged looks. "Yes," motioned the latter, with a
"What is it you want, dear grandpapa?" said Valentine, and
firmness which seemed to declare that with the help of
she endeavored to recall to mind all the things which he
Valentine and his old servant, who both knew what his
would be likely to need; and as the ideas presented
wishes were, he was quite prepared to maintain the contest.
themselves to her mind, she repeated them aloud, then, -"Do you wish for a notary?" asked Villefort.
finding that all her efforts elicited nothing but a constant
"No," -- she said, "Come, since this plan does not answer, I "Yes."
will have recourse to another." She then recited all the letters "What to do?"
of the alphabet from A down to N. When she arrived at that
letter the paralytic made her understand that she had spoken Noirtier made no answer. "What do you want with a
the initial letter of the thing he wanted. "Ah," said Valentine, notary?" again repeated Villefort. The invalid's eye remained
"the thing you desire begins with the letter N; it is with N fixed, by which expression he intended to intimate that his
that we have to do, then. Well, let me see, what can you want resolution was unalterable. "Is it to do us some ill turn? Do
you think it is worth while?" said Villefort.
that begins with N? Na -- Ne -- Ni -- No" -"Yes." Noirtier raised his eyes, it was the sign agreed on
between him and Valentine when he wanted anything.

"Still," said Barrois, with the freedom and fidelity of an old
servant, "if M. Noirtier asks for a notary, I suppose he really
"Ah, it is No, then?"
wishes for a notary; therefore I shall go at once and fetch
"Yes." Valentine fetched a dictionary, which she placed on a one." Barrois acknowledged no master but Noirtier, and
desk before Noirtier; she opened it, and, seeing that the odd never allowed his desires in any way to be contradicted.
man's eye was thoroughly fixed on its pages, she ran her "Yes, I do want a notary," motioned the old man, shutting his
finger quickly up and down the columns. During the six eyes with a look of defiance, which seemed to say, "and I
years which had passed since Noirtier first fell into this sad should like to see the person who dares to refuse my
state, Valentine's powers of invention had been too often put request."
to the test not to render her expert in devising expedients for
gaining a knowledge of his wishes, and the constant practice "You shall have a notary, as you absolutely wish for one, sir,"
had so perfected her in the art that she guessed the old man's said Villefort; "but I shall explain to him your state of health,
meaning as quickly as if he himself had been able to seek for and make excuses for you, for the scene cannot fail of being a
what he wanted. At the word "Notary," Noirtier made a sign most ridiculous one."
"Yes, yes, yes," said the old man's eye.

to her to stop. "Notary," said she, "do you want a notary, "Never mind that," said Barrois; "I shall go and fetch a notary,
dear grandpapa?" The old man again signified that it was a nevertheless," -- and the old servant departed triumphantly
notary he desired.
on his mission.
"You would wish a notary to be sent for then?" said

247


CHAPTER 59


Chapter 59

A

s soon as Barrois had left the room, Noirtier looked at
Valentine with a malicious expression that said many
things. The young girl perfectly understood the look, and so
did Villefort, for his countenance became clouded, and he
knitted his eyebrows angrily. He took a seat, and quietly
awaited the arrival of the notary. Noirtier saw him seat
himself with an appearance of perfect indifference, at the
same time giving a side look at Valentine, which made her
understand that she also was to remain in the room.
Three-quarters of an hour after, Barrois returned, bringing
the notary with him. "Sir," said Villefort, after the first
salutations were over, "you were sent for by M. Noirtier,
whom you see here. All his limbs have become completely
paralysed, he has lost his voice also, and we ourselves find
much trouble in endeavoring to catch some fragments of his
meaning." Noirtier cast an appealing look on Valentine,
which look was at once so earnest and imperative, that she
answered immediately. "Sir," said she, "I perfectly
understand my grandfather's meaning at all times."
"That is quite true," said Barrois; "and that is what I told the
gentleman as we walked along."
"Permit me," said the notary, turning first to Villefort and
then to Valentine -- "permit me to state that the case in
question is just one of those in which a public officer like
myself cannot proceed to act without thereby incurring a
dangerous responsibility. The first thing necessary to render
an act valid is, that the notary should be thoroughly
convinced that he has faithfully interpreted the will and
wishes of the person dictating the act. Now I cannot be sure
of the approbation or disapprobation of a client who cannot
speak, and as the object of his desire or his repugnance
cannot be clearly proved to me, on account of his want of
speech, my services here would be quite useless, and cannot
be legally exercised." The notary then prepared to retire. An
imperceptible smile of triumph was expressed on the lips of
the procureur. Noirtier looked at Valentine with an
expression so full of grief, that she arrested the departure of
the notary. "Sir," said she, "the language which I speak with
my grandfather may be easily learnt, and I can teach you in a
few minutes, to understand it almost as well as I can myself.
Will you tell me what you require, in order to set your
conscience quite at ease on the subject?"

THE WILL

The Will
thoughts?"
"Yes."
"It was you who sent for me?"
"Yes."
"To make your will?"
"Yes."
"And you do not wish me to go away without fulfilling your
original intentions?" The old man winked violently. "Well,
sir," said the young girl, "do you understand now, and is
your conscience perfectly at rest on the subject?" But before
the notary could answer, Villefort had drawn him aside.
"Sir," said he, "do you suppose for a moment that a man can
sustain a physical shock, such as M. Noirtier has received,
without any detriment to his mental faculties?"
"It is not exactly that, sir," said the notary, "which makes me
uneasy, but the difficulty will be in wording his thoughts
and intentions, so as to be able to get his answers."
"You must see that to be an utter impossibility," said Villefort.
Valentine and the old man heard this conversation, and
Noirtier fixed his eye so earnestly on Valentine that she felt
bound to answer to the look.
"Sir," said she, "that need not make you uneasy, however
difficult it may at first sight appear to be. I can discover and
explain to you my grandfather's thoughts, so as to put an
end to all your doubts and fears on the subject. I have now
been six years with M. Noirtier, and let him tell you if ever
once, during that time, he has entertained a thought which
he was unable to make me understand."
"No," signed the old man.
"Let us try what we can do, then," said the notary. "You
accept this young lady as your interpreter, M. Noirtier?"
"Yes."

"Well, sir, what do you require of me, and what document is
it that you wish to be drawn up?" Valentine named all the
letters of the alphabet until she came to W. At this letter the
eloquent eye of Noirtier gave her notice that she was to stop.
"It is very evident that it is the letter W which M. Noirtier
wants," said the notary. "Wait," said Valentine; and, turning
"In order to render an act valid, I must be certain of the to her grandfather, she repeated, "Wa -- We -- Wi" -- The old
approbation or disapprobation of my client. Illness of body man stopped her at the last syllable. Valentine then took the
would not affect the validity of the deed, but sanity of mind dictionary, and the notary watched her while she turned
is absolutely requisite."
over the pages. She passed her finger slowly down the
"Well, sir, by the help of two signs, with which I will columns, and when she came to the word "Will," M.
acquaint you presently, you may ascertain with perfect Noirtier's eye bade her stop. "Will," said the notary; "it is
certainty that my grandfather is still in the full possession of very evident that M. Noirtier is desirous of making his will."
all his mental faculties. M. Noirtier, being deprived of voice "Yes, yes, yes," motioned the invalid.
and motion, is accustomed to convey his meaning by closing
"Really, sir, you must allow that this is most extraordinary,"
his eyes when he wishes to signify `yes,' and to wink when
said the astonished notary, turning to M. de Villefort. "Yes,"
he means `no.' You now know quite enough to enable you to
said the procureur, "and I think the will promises to be yet
converse with M. Noirtier; -- try." Noirtier gave Valentine
more extraordinary, for I cannot see how it is to be drawn up
such a look of tenderness and gratitude that it was
without the intervention of Valentine, and she may, perhaps,
comprehended even by the notary himself. "You have heard
be considered as too much interested in its contents to allow
and understood what your granddaughter has been saying,
of her being a suitable interpreter of the obscure and
sir, have you?" asked the notary. Noirtier closed his eyes.
ill-defined wishes of her grandfather."
"And you approve of what she said -- that is to say, you
declare that the signs which she mentioned are really those "No, no, no," replied the eye of the paralytic.
by means of which you are accustomed to convey your
"What?" said Villefort, "do you mean to say that Valentine is
248

not interested in your will?"

"Yes."

"No."

"The stock is in your own hands?" The look which M.
Noirtier cast on Barrois showed that there was something
"Sir," said the notary, whose interest had been greatly excited,
wanting which he knew where to find. The old servant left
and who had resolved on publishing far and wide the
the room, and presently returned, bringing with him a small
account of this extraordinary and picturesque scene, "what
casket. "Do you permit us to open this casket?" asked the
appeared so impossible to me an hour ago, has now become
notary. Noirtier gave his assent. They opened it, and found
quite easy and practicable, and this may be a perfectly valid
900,000 francs in bank scrip. The first notary handed over
will, provided it be read in the presence of seven witnesses,
each note, as he examined it, to his colleague.
approved by the testator, and sealed by the notary in the
presence of the witnesses. As to the time, it will not require The total amount was found to be as M. Noirtier had stated.
very much more than the generality of wills. There are "It is all as he has said; it is very evident that the mind still
certain forms necessary to be gone through, and which are retains its full force and vigor." Then, turning towards the
always the same. As to the details, the greater part will be paralytic, he said, "You possess, then, 900,000 francs of
furnished afterwards by the state in which we find the affairs capital, which, according to the manner in which you have
of the testator, and by yourself, who, having had the invested it, ought to bring in an income of about 40,000
management of them, can doubtless give full information on livres?"
the subject. But besides all this, in order that the instrument
"Yes."
may not be contested, I am anxious to give it the greatest
possible authenticity, therefore, one of my colleagues will "To whom do you desire to leave this fortune?"
help me, and, contrary to custom, will assist in the dictation "Oh," said Madame de Villefort, "there is not much doubt on
of the testament. Are you satisfied, sir?" continued the that subject. M. Noirtier tenderly loves his granddaughter,
notary, addressing the old man.
Mademoiselle de Villefort; it is she who has nursed and
"Yes," looked the invalid, his eye beaming with delight at the
ready interpretation of his meaning.
"What is he going to do?" thought Villefort, whose position
demanded much reserve, but who was longing to know
what his father's intentions were. He left the room to give
orders for another notary to be sent, but Barrois, who had
heard all that passed, had guessed his master's wishes, and
had already gone to fetch one. The procureur then told his
wife to come up. In the course of a quarter of an hour every
one had assembled in the chamber of the paralytic; the
second notary had also arrived. A few words sufficed for a
mutual understanding between the two officers of the law.
They read to Noirtier the formal copy of a will, in order to
give him an idea of the terms in which such documents are
generally couched; then, in order to test the capacity of the
testator, the first notary said, turning towards him, -- "When
an individual makes his will, it is generally in favor or in
prejudice of some person."
"Yes."
"Have you an exact idea of the amount of your fortune?"

tended him for six years, and has, by her devoted attention,
fully secured the affection, I had almost said the gratitude, of
her grandfather, and it is but just that she should reap the
fruit of her devotion." The eye of Noirtier clearly showed by
its expression that he was not deceived by the false assent
given by Madame de Villefort's words and manner to the
motives which she supposed him to entertain. "Is it, then, to
Mademoiselle Valentine de Villefort that you leave these
900,000 francs?" demanded the notary, thinking he had only
to insert this clause, but waiting first for the assent of
Noirtier, which it was necessary should be given before all
the witnesses of this singular scene. Valentine, when her
name was made the subject of discussion, had stepped back,
to escape unpleasant observation; her eyes were cast down,
and she was crying. The old man looked at her for an instant
with an expression of the deepest tenderness, then, turning
towards the notary, he significantly winked his eye in token
of dissent.
"What," said the notary, "do you not intend making
Mademoiselle Valentine de Villefort your residuary legatee?"
"No."

"Yes."

"You are not making any mistake, are you?" said the notary;
"I will name to you several sums which will increase by "you really mean to declare that such is not your intention?"
gradation; you will stop me when I reach the one
"No," repeated Noirtier; "No." Valentine raised her head,
representing the amount of your own possessions?"
struck dumb with astonishment. It was not so much the
"Yes." There was a kind of solemnity in this interrogation. conviction that she was disinherited that caused her grief,
Never had the struggle between mind and matter been more but her total inability to account for the feelings which had
apparent than now, and if it was not a sublime, it was, at provoked her grandfather to such an act. But Noirtier looked
least, a curious spectacle. They had formed a circle round the at her with so much affectionate tenderness that she
invalid; the second notary was sitting at a table, prepared for exclaimed, "Oh, grandpapa, I see now that it is only your
writing, and his colleague was standing before the testator in fortune of which you deprive me; you still leave me the love
the act of interrogating him on the subject to which we have which I have always enjoyed."
alluded. "Your fortune exceeds 300,000 francs, does it not?"
"Ah, yes, most assuredly," said the eyes of the paralytic, for
asked he. Noirtier made a sign that it did. "Do you possess
he closed them with an expression which Valentine could
400,000 francs?" inquired the notary. Noirtier's eye remained
not mistake. "Thank you, thank you," murmured she. The
immovable. "Five hundred thousand?" The same expression
old man's declaration that Valentine was not the destined
continued. "Six hundred thousand -- 700,000 -- 800,000 -inheritor of his fortune had excited the hopes of Madame de
900,000?" Noirtier stopped him at the last-named sum. "You
Villefort; she gradually approached the invalid, and said:
are then in possession of 900,000 francs?" asked the notary.
"Then, doubtless, dear M. Noirtier, you intend leaving your
"Yes."
fortune to your grandson, Edward de Villefort?" The
"In landed property?"
winking of the eyes which answered this speech was most
decided and terrible, and expressed a feeling almost
"No."
amounting to hatred.
"In stock?"
"No?" said the notary; "then, perhaps, it is to your son, M. de
249


CHAPTER 59

Villefort?"
"No." The two notaries looked at each other in mute
astonishment and inquiry as to what were the real intentions
of the testator. Villefort and his wife both grew red, one from
shame, the other from anger.
"What have we all done, then, dear grandpapa?" said
Valentine; "you no longer seem to love any of us?" The old
man's eyes passed rapidly from Villefort and his wife, and
rested on Valentine with a look of unutterable fondness.
"Well," said she; "if you love me, grandpapa, try and bring
that love to bear upon your actions at this present moment.
You know me well enough to be quite sure that I have never
thought of your fortune; besides, they say I am already rich
in right of my mother -- too rich, even. Explain yourself,
then." Noirtier fixed his intelligent eyes on Valentine's hand.
"My hand?" said she.
"Yes."

THE WILL
lips with vexation, while Madame de Villefort could not
succeed in repressing an inward feeling of joy, which, in
spite of herself, appeared in her whole countenance. "But,"
said Villefort, who was the first to break the silence, "I
consider that I am the best judge of the propriety of the
marriage in question. I am the only person possessing the
right to dispose of my daughter's hand. It is my wish that
she should marry M. Franz d'Epinay -- and she shall marry
him." Valentine sank weeping into a chair.
"Sir," said the notary, "how do you intend disposing of your
fortune in case Mademoiselle de Villefort still determines on
marrying M. Franz?" The old man gave no answer. "You will,
of course, dispose of it in some way or other?"
"Yes."
"In favor of some member of your family?"
"No."

"Her hand!" exclaimed every one.

"Do you intend devoting it to charitable purposes, then?"
pursued the notary.

"Oh, gentlemen, you see it is all useless, and that my father's
mind is really impaired," said Villefort.

"Yes."

"But," said the notary, "you are aware that the law does not
"Ah," cried Valentine suddenly, "I understand. It is my
allow a son to be entirely deprived of his patrimony?"
marriage you mean, is it not, dear grandpapa?"
"Yes."
"Yes, yes, yes," signed the paralytic, casting on Valentine a
"You only intend, then, to dispose of that part of your
look of joyful gratitude for having guessed his meaning.
fortune which the law allows you to subtract from the
"You are angry with us all on account of this marriage, are
inheritance of your son?" Noirtier made no answer. "Do you
you not?"
still wish to dispose of all?"
"Yes?"
"Yes."
"Really, this is too absurd," said Villefort.
"But they will contest the will after your death?"
"Excuse me, sir," replied the notary; "on the contrary, the
"No."
meaning of M. Noirtier is quite evident to me, and I can
"My father knows me," replied Villefort; "he is quite sure that
quite easily connect the train of ideas passing in his mind."
his wishes will be held sacred by me; besides, he
"You do not wish me to marry M. Franz d'Epinay?" observed
understands that in my position I cannot plead against the
Valentine.
poor." The eye of Noirtier beamed with triumph. "What do
"I do not wish it," said the eye of her grandfather. "And you you decide on, sir?" asked the notary of Villefort.
disinherit your granddaughter," continued the notary,
"Nothing, sir; it is a resolution which my father has taken
"because she has contracted an engagement contrary to your
and I know he never alters his mind. I am quite resigned.
wishes?"
These 900,000 francs will go out of the family in order to
"Yes."
enrich some hospital; but it is ridiculous thus to yield to the
caprices of an old man, and I shall, therefore, act according
"So that, but for this marriage, she would have been your
to my conscience." Having said this, Villefort quitted the
heir?"
room with his wife, leaving his father at liberty to do as he
"Yes." There was a profound silence. The two notaries were pleased. The same day the will was made, the witnesses
holding a consultation as to the best means of proceeding were brought, it was approved by the old man, sealed in the
with the affair. Valentine was looking at her grandfather presence of all and given in charge to M. Deschamps, the
with a smile of intense gratitude, and Villefort was biting his family notary.

250


Chapter 60

The Telegraph

M

. and Madame de Villefort found on their return that
the Count of Monte Cristo, who had come to visit
them in their absence, had been ushered into the
drawing-room, and was still awaiting them there. Madame
de Villefort, who had not yet sufficiently recovered from her
late emotion to allow of her entertaining visitors so
immediately, retired to her bedroom, while the procureur,
who could better depend upon himself, proceeded at once to
the salon. Although M. de Villefort flattered himself that, to
all outward view, he had completely masked the feelings
which were passing in his mind, he did not know that the
cloud was still lowering on his brow, so much so that the
count, whose smile was radiant, immediately noticed his
sombre and thoughtful air. "Ma foi," said Monte Cristo, after
the first compliments were over, "what is the matter with
you, M. de Villefort? Have I arrived at the moment when
you were drawing up an indictment for a capital crime?"
Villefort tried to smile. "No, count," he replied, "I am the only
victim in this case. It is I who lose my cause, and it is ill-luck,
obstinacy, and folly which have caused it to be decided
against me."
"To what do you refer?" said Monte Cristo with well-feigned
interest. "Have you really met with some great misfortune?"
"Oh, no, monsieur," said Villefort with a bitter smile; "it is
only a loss of money which I have sustained -- nothing
worth mentioning, I assure you."

most gracious smiles. "What is this that M. de Villefort has
been telling me?" demanded Monte Cristo "and what
incomprehensible misfortune" -"Incomprehensible is not the word," interrupted the
procureur, shrugging his shoulders. "It is an old man's
caprice."
"And is there no means of making him revoke his decision?"
"Yes," said Madame de Villefort; "and it is still entirely in the
power of my husband to cause the will, which is now in
prejudice of Valentine, to be altered in her favor." The count,
who perceived that M. and Madame de Villefort were
beginning to speak in parables, appeared to pay no attention
to the conversation, and feigned to be busily engaged in
watching Edward, who was mischievously pouring some
ink into the bird's water-glass. "My dear," said Villefort, in
answer to his wife, "you know I have never been accustomed
to play the patriarch in my family, nor have I ever
considered that the fate of a universe was to be decided by
my nod. Nevertheless, it is necessary that my will should be
respected in my family, and that the folly of an old man and
the caprice of a child should not be allowed to overturn a
project which I have entertained for so many years. The
Baron d'Epinay was my friend, as you know, and an alliance
with his son is the most suitable thing that could possibly be
arranged."

"True," said Monte Cristo, "the loss of a sum of money
becomes almost immaterial with a fortune such as you "Do you think," said Madame de Villefort, "that Valentine is
in league with him? She has always been opposed to this
possess, and to one of your philosophic spirit."
marriage, and I should not be at all surprised if what we
"It is not so much the loss of the money that vexes me," said
have just seen and heard is nothing but the execution of a
Villefort, "though, after all, 900,000 francs are worth
plan concerted between them."
regretting; but I am the more annoyed with this fate, chance,
or whatever you please to call the power which has "Madame," said Villefort, "believe me, a fortune of 900,000
destroyed my hopes and my fortune, and may blast the francs is not so easily renounced."
prospects of my child also, as it is all occasioned by an old "She could, nevertheless, make up her mind to renounce the
man relapsed into second childhood."
world, sir, since it is only about a year ago that she herself
"What do you say?" said the count; "900,000 francs? It is
indeed a sum which might be regretted even by a
philosopher. And who is the cause of all this annoyance?"

proposed entering a convent."
"Never mind," replied Villefort; "I say that this marriage
shall be consummated."

"My father, as I told you."

"Notwithstanding your father's wishes to the contrary?" said
"M. Noirtier? But I thought you told me he had become Madame de Villefort, selecting a new point of attack. "That is
entirely paralyzed, and that all his faculties were completely a serious thing." Monte Cristo, who pretended not to be
listening, heard however, every word that was said.
destroyed?"
"Madame," replied Villefort "I can truly say that I have
"Yes, his bodily faculties, for he can neither move nor speak,
always entertained a high respect for my father, because, to
nevertheless he thinks, acts, and wills in the manner I have
the natural feeling of relationship was added the
described. I left him about five minutes ago, and he is now
consciousness of his moral superiority. The name of father is
occupied in dictating his will to two notaries."
sacred in two senses; he should be reverenced as the author
"But to do this he must have spoken?"
of our being and as a master whom we ought to obey. But,
under the present circumstances, I am justified in doubting
"He has done better than that -- he has made himself
the wisdom of an old man who, because he hated the father,
understood."
vents his anger on the son. It would be ridiculous in me to
"How was such a thing possible?"
regulate my conduct by such caprices. I shall still continue to
"By the help of his eyes, which are still full of life, and, as preserve the same respect toward M. Noirtier; I will suffer,
without complaint, the pecuniary deprivation to which he
you perceive, possess the power of inflicting mortal injury."
has subjected me; but I shall remain firm in my
"My dear," said Madame de Villefort, who had just entered determination, and the world shall see which party his
the room, "perhaps you exaggerate the evil."
reason on his side. Consequently I shall marry my daughter
"Good-morning, madame," said the count, bowing. Madame to the Baron Franz d'Epinay, because I consider it would be a
de Villefort acknowledged the salutation with one of her proper and eligible match for her to make, and, in short,
251


CHAPTER 60


THE TELEGRAPH

because I choose to bestow my daughter's hand on
whomever I please."

at Monte Cristo as if he wished to read in his countenance
the real feelings which had dictated the words he had just
uttered. But the count completely baffled the procureur, and
"What?" said the count, the approbation of whose eye
prevented him from discovering anything beneath the
Villefort had frequently solicited during this speech. "What?
never-varying smile he was so constantly in the habit of
Do you say that M. Noirtier disinherits Mademoiselle de
assuming. "Although," said Villefort, "it will be a serious
Villefort because she is going to marry M. le Baron Franz
thing for Valentine to lose her grandfather's fortune, I do not
d'Epinay?"
think that M. d'Epinay will be frightened at this pecuniary
"Yes, sir, that is the reason," said Villefort, shrugging his loss. He will, perhaps, hold me in greater esteem than the
shoulders.
money itself, seeing that I sacrifice everything in order to
keep my word with him. Besides, he knows that Valentine is
"The apparent reason, at least," said Madame de Villefort.
rich in right of her mother, and that she will, in all
"The real reason, madame, I can assure you; I know my probability, inherit the fortune of M. and Madame de
father."
Saint-Meran, her mother's parents, who both love her
"But I want to know in what way M. d'Epinay can have tenderly."
displeased your father more than any other person?"
"And who are fully as well worth loving and tending as M.
Noirtier," said Madame de Villefort; "besides, they are to
come to Paris in about a month, and Valentine, after the
affront she has received, need not consider it necessary to
continue to bury herself alive by being shut up with M.
"The same," said Villefort.
Noirtier." The count listened with satisfaction to this tale of
"Well, but he is a charming young man, according to my wounded self-love and defeated ambition. "But it seems to
ideas."
me," said Monte Cristo, "and I must begin by asking your
"He is, which makes me believe that it is only an excuse of M. pardon for what I am about to say, that if M. Noirtier
Noirtier to prevent his granddaughter marrying; old men are disinherits Mademoiselle de Villefort because she is going to
always so selfish in their affection," said Madame de marry a man whose father he detested, he cannot have the
same cause of complaint against this dear Edward."
Villefort.
"I believe I know M. Franz d'Epinay," said the count; "is he
not the son of General de Quesnel, who was created Baron
d'Epinay by Charles X.?"

"True," said Madame de Villefort, with an intonation of voice
which it is impossible to describe; "is it not unjust -shamefully unjust? Poor Edward is as much M. Noirtier's
"Ah, ma foi, who is to know?"
grandchild as Valentine, and yet, if she had not been going
to marry M. Franz, M. Noirtier would have left her all his
"Perhaps it is some political difference?"
money; and supposing Valentine to be disinherited by her
"My father and the Baron d'Epinay lived in the stormy times
grandfather, she will still be three times richer than he." The
of which I only saw the ending," said Villefort.
count listened and said no more. "Count," said Villefort, "we
"Was not your father a Bonapartist?" asked Monte Cristo; "I will not entertain you any longer with our family
think I remember that you told me something of that kind."
misfortunes. It is true that my patrimony will go to endow
charitable institutions, and my father will have deprived me
"My father has been a Jacobin more than anything else," said
of my lawful inheritance without any reason for doing so,
Villefort, carried by his emotion beyond the bounds of
but I shall have the satisfaction of knowing that I have acted
prudence; "and the senator's robe, which Napoleon cast on
like a man of sense and feeling. M. d'Epinay, to whom I had
his shoulders, only served to disguise the old man without
promised the interest of this sum, shall receive it, even if I
in any degree changing him. When my father conspired, it
endure the most cruel privations."
was not for the emperor, it was against the Bourbons; for M.
Noirtier possessed this peculiarity, he never projected any "However," said Madame de Villefort, returning to the one
Utopian schemes which could never be realized, but strove idea which incessantly occupied her mind, "perhaps it
for possibilities, and he applied to the realization of these would be better to explain this unlucky affair to M. d'Epinay,
possibilities the terrible theories of The Mountain, -- theories in order to give him the opportunity of himself renouncing
that never shrank from any means that were deemed his claim to the hand of Mademoiselle de Villefort."
necessary to bring about the desired result."
"Ah, that would be a great pity," said Villefort.
"Well," said Monte Cristo, "it is just as I thought; it was
"A great pity," said Monte Cristo.
politics which brought Noirtier and M. d'Epinay into
personal contact. Although General d'Epinay served under "Undoubtedly," said Villefort, moderating the tones of his
Napoleon, did he not still retain royalist sentiments? And voice, "a marriage once concerted and then broken off,
was he not the person who was assassinated one evening on throws a sort of discredit on a young lady; then again, the
leaving a Bonapartist meeting to which he had been invited old reports, which I was so anxious to put an end to, will
on the supposition that he favored the cause of the instantly gain ground. No, it will all go well; M. d'Epinay, if
emperor?" Villefort looked at the count almost with terror. he is an honorable man, will consider himself more than ever
pledged to Mademoiselle de Villefort, unless he were
"Am I mistaken, then?" said Monte Cristo.
actuated by a decided feeling of avarice, but that is
"No, sir, the facts were precisely what you have stated," said
impossible."
Madame de Villefort; "and it was to prevent the renewal of
old feuds that M. de Villefort formed the idea of uniting in "I agree with M. de Villefort," said Monte Cristo, fixing his
the bonds of affection the two children of these inveterate eyes on Madame de Villefort; "and if I were sufficiently
intimate with him to allow of giving my advice, I would
enemies."
persuade him, since I have been told M. d'Epinay is coming
"It was a sublime and charitable thought," said Monte Cristo,
back, to settle this affair at once beyond all possibility of
"and the whole world should applaud it. It would be noble
revocation. I will answer for the success of a project which
to see Mademoiselle Noirtier de Villefort assuming the title
will reflect so much honor on M. de Villefort." The procureur
of Madame Franz d'Epinay." Villefort shuddered and looked
"But," said Monte Cristo "do you not know any cause for this
hatred?"

252

arose, delighted with the proposition, but his wife slightly
changed color. "Well, that is all that I wanted, and I will be
guided by a counsellor such as you are," said he, extending
his hand to Monte Cristo. "Therefore let every one here look
upon what has passed to-day as if it had not happened, and
as though we had never thought of such a thing as a change
in our original plans."

Monte Cristo.
"No, count, -- I hope -- I assure you I shall do my best,"
stammered Villefort.

"Oh," said Monte Cristo, "I allow of no excuse. On Saturday,
at six o'clock. I shall be expecting you, and if you fail to come,
I shall think -- for how do I know to the contrary? -- that this
house, which his remained uninhabited for twenty years,
"Sir," said the count, "the world, unjust as it is, will be
must have some gloomy tradition or dreadful legend
pleased with your resolution; your friends will be proud of
connected with it."
you, and M. d'Epinay, even if he took Mademoiselle de
Villefort without any dowry, which he will not do, would be "I will come, count, -- I will be sure to come," said Villefort
delighted with the idea of entering a family which could eagerly.
make such sacrifices in order to keep a promise and fulfil a "Thank you," said Monte Cristo; "now you must permit me
duty." At the conclusion of these words, the count rose to to take my leave of you."
depart. "Are you going to leave us, count?" said Madame de
"You said before that you were obliged to leave us,
Villefort.
monsieur," said Madame de Villefort, "and you were about
"I am sorry to say I must do so, madame, I only came to to tell us why when your attention was called to some other
remind you of your promise for Saturday."
subject."
"Did you fear that we should forget it?"
"Indeed madame," said Monte Cristo: "I scarcely know if I
"You are very good, madame, but M. de Villefort has so dare tell you where I am going."
many important and urgent occupations."
"Nonsense; say on."
"My husband has given me his word, sir," said Madame de "Well, then, it is to see a thing on which I have sometimes
Villefort; "you have just seen him resolve to keep it when he mused for hours together."
has everything to lose, and surely there is more reason for
"What is it?"
his doing so where he has everything to gain."
"And," said Villefort, "is it at your house in the "A telegraph. So now I have told my secret."
Champs-Elysees that you receive your visitors?"

"A telegraph?" repeated Madame de Villefort.

"No," said Monte Cristo, "which is precisely the reason "Yes, a telegraph. I had often seen one placed at the end of a
which renders your kindness more meritorious, -- it is in the road on a hillock, and in the light of the sun its black arms,
country."
bending in every direction, always reminded me of the claws
of an immense beetle, and I assure you it was never without
"In the country?"
emotion that I gazed on it, for I could not help thinking how
"Yes."
wonderful it was that these various signs should be made to
cleave the air with such precision as to convey to the
"Where is it, then? Near Paris, is it not?"
distance of three hundred leagues the ideas and wishes of a
"Very near, only half a league from the Barriers, -- it is at
man sitting at a table at one end of the line to another man
Auteuil."
similarly placed at the opposite extremity, and all this
"At Auteuil?" said Villefort; "true, Madame de Villefort told effected by a simple act of volition on the part of the sender
me you lived at Auteuil, since it was to your house that she of the message. I began to think of genii, sylphs, gnomes, in
was taken. And in what part of Auteuil do you reside?"
short, of all the ministers of the occult sciences, until I
laughed aloud at the freaks of my own imagination. Now, it
"Rue de la Fontaine."
never occurred to me to wish for a nearer inspection of these
"Rue de la Fontaine!" exclaimed Villefort in an agitated tone; large insects, with their long black claws, for I always feared
"at what number?"
to find under their stone wings some little human genius
fagged to death with cabals, factions, and government
"No. 28."
intrigues. But one fine day I learned that the mover of this
"Then," cried Villefort, "was it you who bought M. de telegraph was only a poor wretch, hired for twelve hundred
Saint-Meran's house!"
francs a year, and employed all day, not in studying the
"Did it belong to M. de Saint-Meran?" demanded Monte heavens like an astronomer, or in gazing on the water like an
angler, or even in enjoying the privilege of observing the
Cristo.
country around him, but all his monotonous life was passed
"Yes," replied Madame de Villefort; "and, would you believe
in watching his white-bellied, black-clawed fellow insect,
it, count" -four or five leagues distant from him. At length I felt a desire
"Believe what?"
to study this living chrysalis more closely, and to endeavor
to understand the secret part played by these insect-actors
"You think this house pretty, do you not?"
when they occupy themselves simply with pulling different
"I think it charming."
pieces of string."
"Well, my husband would never live in it."
"And are you going there?"
"Indeed?" returned Monte Cristo, "that is a prejudice on your
part, M. de Villefort, for which I am quite at a loss to
account."
"I do not like Auteuil, sir," said the procureur, making an
evident effort to appear calm.

"I am."
"What telegraph do you intend visiting? that of the home
department, or of the observatory?"

"Oh, no; I should find there people who would force me to
understand things of which I would prefer to remain
"But I hope you will not carry your antipathy so far as to ignorant, and who would try to explain to me, in spite of
deprive me of the pleasure of your company, sir," said myself, a mystery which even they do not understand. Ma
253


CHAPTER 60


THE TELEGRAPH

foi, I should wish to keep my illusions concerning insects
unimpaired; it is quite enough to have those dissipated
which I had formed of my fellow-creatures. I shall, therefore,
not visit either of these telegraphs, but one in the open
country where I shall find a good-natured simpleton, who
knows no more than the machine he is employed to work."
"You are a singular man," said Villefort.
"What line would you advise me to study?"
"The one that is most in use just at this time."
"The Spanish one, you mean, I suppose?"
"Yes; should you like a letter to the minister that they might
explain to you" -"No," said Monte Cristo; "since, as I told you before, I do not
wish to comprehend it. The moment I understand it there
will no longer exist a telegraph for me; it will he nothing
more than a sign from M. Duchatel, or from M. Montalivet,
transmitted to the prefect of Bayonne, mystified by two
Greek words, tele, graphein. It is the insect with black claws,

254

and the awful word which I wish to retain in my
imagination in all its purity and all its importance."
"Go then; for in the course of two hours it will be dark, and
you will not be able to see anything."
"Ma foi, you frighten me. Which is the nearest way?
Bayonne?"
"Yes; the road to Bayonne."
"And afterwards the road to Chatillon?"
"Yes."
"By the tower of Montlhery, you mean?"
"Yes."
"Thank you. Good-by. On Saturday I will tell you my
impressions concerning the telegraph." At the door the count
was met by the two notaries, who had just completed the act
which was to disinherit Valentine, and who were leaving
under the conviction of having done a thing which could not
fail of redounding considerably to their credit.


Chapter 61

How A Gardener May Get Rid Of The Dormice That
Eat His Peaches

N

ot on the same night, as he had intended, but the next
morning, the Count of Monte Cristo went out by the
Barrier d'Enfer, taking the road to Orleans. Leaving the
village of Linas, without stopping at the telegraph, which
flourished its great bony arms as he passed, the count
reached the tower of Montlhery, situated, as every one
knows, upon the highest point of the plain of that name. At
the foot of the hill the count dismounted and began to
ascend by a little winding path, about eighteen inches wide;
when he reached the summit he found himself stopped by a
hedge, upon which green fruit had succeeded to red and
white flowers.
Monte Cristo looked for the entrance to the enclosure, and
was not long in finding a little wooden gate, working on
willow hinges, and fastened with a nail and string. The
count soon mastered the mechanism, the gate opened, and
he then found himself in a little garden, about twenty feet
long by twelve wide, bounded on one side by part of the
hedge, which contained the ingenious contrivance we have
called a gate, and on the other by the old tower, covered
with ivy and studded with wall-flowers. No one would have
thought in looking at this old, weather-beaten, floral-decked
tower (which might be likened to an elderly dame dressed
up to receive her grandchildren at a birthday feast) that it
would have been capable of telling strange things, if, -- in
addition to the menacing ears which the proverb says all
walls are provided with, -- it had also a voice. The garden
was crossed by a path of red gravel, edged by a border of
thick box, of many years' growth, and of a tone and color
that would have delighted the heart of Delacroix, our
modern Rubens. This path was formed in the shape of the
figure of 8, thus, in its windings, making a walk of sixty feet
in a garden of only twenty.

himself facing a man about fifty years old, who was plucking
strawberries, which he was placing upon grape leaves. He
had twelve leaves and about as many strawberries, which,
on rising suddenly, he let fall from his hand. "You are
gathering your crop, sir?" said Monte Cristo, smiling.
"Excuse me, sir," replied the man, raising his hand to his cap;
"I am not up there, I know, but I have only just come down."
"Do not let me interfere with you in anything, my friend,"
said the count; "gather your strawberries, if, indeed, there
are any left."
"I have ten left," said the man, "for here are eleven, and I had
twenty-one, five more than last year. But I am not surprised;
the spring has been warm this year, and strawberries require
heat, sir. This is the reason that, instead of the sixteen I had
last year, I have this year, you see, eleven, already plucked -twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, seventeen,
eighteen. Ah, I miss three, they were here last night, sir -- I
am sure they were here -- I counted them. It must be the
Mere Simon's son who has stolen them; I saw him strolling
about here this morning. Ah, the young rascal -- stealing in a
garden -- he does not know where that may lead him to."
"Certainly, it is wrong," said Monte Cristo, "but you should
take into consideration the youth and greediness of the
delinquent."
"Of course," said the gardener, "but that does not make it the
less unpleasant. But, sir, once more I beg pardon; perhaps
you are an officer that I am detaining here." And he glanced
timidly at the count's blue coat.

"Calm yourself, my friend," said the count, with the smile
which he made at will either terrible or benevolent, and
which now expressed only the kindliest feeling; "I am not an
Never had Flora, the fresh and smiling goddess of gardeners, inspector, but a traveller, brought here by a curiosity he half
been honored with a purer or more scrupulous worship than repents of, since he causes you to lose your time."
that which was paid to her in this little enclosure. In fact, of "Ah, my time is not valuable," replied the man with a
the twenty rose-trees which formed the parterre, not one melancholy smile. "Still it belongs to government, and I
bore the mark of the slug, nor were there evidences ought not to waste it; but, having received the signal that I
anywhere of the clustering aphis which is so destructive to might rest for an hour" (here he glanced at the sun-dial, for
plants growing in a damp soil. And yet it was not because there was everything in the enclosure of Montlhery, even a
the damp had been excluded from the garden; the earth, sun-dial), "and having ten minutes before me, and my
black as soot, the thick foliage of the trees betrayed its strawberries being ripe, when a day longer -- by-the-by, sir,
presence; besides, had natural humidity been wanting, it do you think dormice eat them?"
could have been immediately supplied by artificial means,
"Indeed, I should think not," replied Monte Cristo; "dormice
thanks to a tank of water, sunk in one of the corners of the
are bad neighbors for us who do not eat them preserved, as
garden, and upon which were stationed a frog and a toad,
the Romans did."
who, from antipathy, no doubt, always remained on the two
opposite sides of the basin. There was not a blade of grass to "What? Did the Romans eat them?" said the gardener -- "ate
be seen in the paths, or a weed in the flower-beds; no fine dormice?"
lady ever trained and watered her geraniums, her cacti, and "I have read so in Petronius," said the count.
her rhododendrons, with more pains than this hitherto
unseen gardener bestowed upon his little enclosure. Monte "Really? They can't be nice, though they do say `as fat as a
Cristo stopped after having closed the gate and fastened the dormouse.' It is not a wonder they are fat, sleeping all day,
and only waking to eat all night. Listen. Last year I had four
string to the nail, and cast a look around.
apricots -- they stole one, I had one nectarine, only one -"The man at the telegraph," said he, "must either engage a well, sir, they ate half of it on the wall; a splendid nectarine -gardener or devote himself passionately to agriculture." I never ate a better."
Suddenly he struck against something crouching behind a
wheelbarrow filled with leaves; the something rose, uttering "You ate it?"
an exclamation of astonishment, and Monte Cristo found "That is to say, the half that was left -- you understand; it
255


CHAPTER 61


HOW A GARDENER MAY GET RID OF THE DORMICE THAT EAT HIS PEACHES

was exquisite, sir. Ah, those gentlemen never choose the
worst morsels; like Mere Simon's son, who has not chosen
the worst strawberries. But this year," continued the
horticulturist, "I'll take care it shall not happen, even if I
should be forced to sit by the whole night to watch when the
strawberries are ripe." Monte Cristo had seen enough. Every
man has a devouring passion in his heart, as every fruit has
its worm; that of the telegraph man was horticulture. He
began gathering the grape-leaves which screened the sun
from the grapes, and won the heart of the gardener. "Did
you come here, sir, to see the telegraph?" he said.
"Yes, if it isn't contrary to the rules."

"Ah, to be sure."
"Those are indeed holidays to me; I go into the garden, I
plant, I prune, I trim, I kill the insects all day long."
"How long have you been here?"
"Ten years, and five as a supernumerary make fifteen."
"You are -- "
"Fifty-five years old."
"How long must you have served to claim the pension?"
"Oh, sir, twenty-five years."

"And how much is the pension?"
"Oh, no," said the gardener; "not in the least, since there is no
danger that anyone can possibly understand what we are "A hundred crowns."
saying."
"Poor humanity!" murmured Monte Cristo.
"I have been told," said the count, "that you do not always "What did you say, sir?" asked the man.
yourselves understand the signals you repeat."
"I was saying it was very interesting."
"That is true, sir, and that is what I like best," said the man,
"What was?"
smiling.
"All you were showing me. And you really understand none
"Why do you like that best?"
of these signals?"
"Because then I have no responsibility. I am a machine then,
and nothing else, and so long as I work, nothing more is "None at all."
required of me."

"And have you never tried to understand them?"

"Is it possible," said Monte Cristo to himself, "that I can have
met with a man that has no ambition? That would spoil my
plans."

"Never. Why should I?"

"Sir," said the gardener, glancing at the sun-dial, "the ten
minutes are almost up; I must return to my post. Will you go
up with me?"

"But still there are some signals only addressed to you."
"Certainly."
"And do you understand them?"
"They are always the same."

"I follow you." Monte Cristo entered the tower, which was
divided into three stories. The tower contained implements,
such as spades, rakes, watering-pots, hung against the wall;
this was all the furniture. The second was the man's
conventional abode, or rather sleeping-place; it contained a
few poor articles of household furniture -- a bed, a table, two
chairs, a stone pitcher -- and some dry herbs, hung up to the
ceiling, which the count recognized as sweet pease, and of
which the good man was preserving the seeds; he had
labelled them with as much care as if he had been master
botanist in the Jardin des Plantes.

"And they mean -- "

"Does it require much study to learn the art of telegraphing?"
asked Monte Cristo.

"By the same sign, which, at the same time, tells my
right-hand correspondent that I am ready, while it gives
notice to my left-hand correspondent to prepare in his turn."

"The study does not take long; it was acting as a
supernumerary that was so tedious."
"And what is the pay?"
"A thousand francs, sir."
"It is nothing."
"No; but then we are lodged, as you perceive."
Monte Cristo looked at the room. They passed to the third
story; it was the telegraph room. Monte Cristo looked in turn
at the two iron handles by which the machine was worked.
"It is very interesting," he said, "but it must be very tedious
for a lifetime."
"Yes. At first my neck was cramped with looking at it, but at
the end of a year I became used to it; and then we have our
hours of recreation, and our holidays."
"Holidays?"
"Yes."
"When?"
"When we have a fog."
256

"Nothing new; You have an hour; or To-morrow."
"This is simple enough," said the count; "but look, is not your
correspondent putting itself in motion?"
"Ah, yes; thank you, sir."
"And what is it saying -- anything you understand?"
"Yes; it asks if I am ready."
"And you reply?"

"It is very ingenious," said the count.
"You will see," said the man proudly; "in five minutes he will
speak."
"I have, then, five minutes," said Monte Cristo to himself; "it
is more time than I require. My dear sir, will you allow me to
ask you a question?"
"What is it, sir?"
"You are fond of gardening?"
"Passionately."
"And you would be pleased to have, instead of this terrace of
twenty feet, an enclosure of two acres?"
"Sir, I should make a terrestrial paradise of it."
"You live badly on your thousand francs?"
"Badly enough; but yet I do live."
"Yes; but you have a wretchedly small garden."
"True, the garden is not large."
"And, then, such as it is, it is filled with dormice, who eat

everything."
"Ah, they are my scourges."
"Tell me, should you have the misfortune to turn your head
while your right-hand correspondent was telegraphing" --

"No, you will lose it, for you are going to alter your
correspondent's message."
"Oh, sir, what are you proposing?"
"A jest."

"I should not see him."

"Sir, unless you force me" --

"Then what would happen?"

"I think I can effectually force you;" and Monte Cristo drew
another packet from his pocket. "Here are ten thousand more
francs," he said, "with the fifteen thousand already in your
pocket, they will make twenty-five thousand. With five
thousand you can buy a pretty little house with two acres of
land; the remaining twenty thousand will bring you in a
thousand francs a year."

"I could not repeat the signals."
"And then?"
"Not having repeated them, through negligence, I should be
fined."
"How much?"
"A hundred francs."
"The tenth of your income -- that would be fine work."
"Ah," said the man.

"A garden with two acres of land!"
"And a thousand francs a year."
"Oh, heavens!"

"Has it ever happened to you?" said Monte Cristo.

"Come, take them," and Monte Cristo forced the bank-notes
into his hand.

"Once, sir, when I was grafting a rose-tree."

"What am I to do?"

"Well, suppose you were to alter a signal, and substitute
another?"

"Nothing very difficult."

"Ah, that is another case; I should be turned off, and lose my
pension."
"Three hundred francs?"
"A hundred crowns, yes, sir; so you see that I am not likely
to do any of these things."
"Not even for fifteen years' wages? Come, it is worth
thinking about?"
"For fifteen thousand francs?"
"Yes."
"Sir, you alarm me."
"Nonsense."
"Sir, you are tempting me?"
"Just so; fifteen thousand francs, do you understand?"
"Sir, let me see my right-hand correspondent."
"On the contrary, do not look at him, but at this."
"What is it?"
"What? Do you not know these bits of paper?"
"Bank-notes!"
"Exactly; there are fifteen of them."
"And whose are they?"
"Yours, if you like."
"Mine?" exclaimed the man, half-suffocated.
"Yes; yours -- your own property."
"Sir, my right-hand correspondent is signalling."
"Let him signal."
"Sir, you have distracted me; I shall be fined."
"That will cost you a hundred francs; you see it is your
interest to take my bank-notes."

"But what is it?"
"To repeat these signs." Monte Cristo took a paper from his
pocket, upon which were drawn three signs, with numbers
to indicate the order in which they were to be worked.
"There, you see it will not take long."
"Yes; but" -"Do this, and you will have nectarines and all the rest." The
shot told; red with fever, while the large drops fell from his
brow, the man executed, one after the other, the three signs
given by the count, in spite of the frightful contortions of the
right-hand correspondent, who, not understanding the
change, began to think the gardener had gone mad. As to the
left-hand one, he conscientiously repeated the same signals,
which were finally transmitted to the Minister of the Interior.
"Now you are rich," said Monte Cristo.
"Yes," replied the man, "but at what a price!"
"Listen, friend," said Monte Cristo. "I do not wish to cause
you any remorse; believe me, then, when I swear to you that
you have wronged no man, but on the contrary have
benefited mankind." The man looked at the bank-notes, felt
them, counted them, turned pale, then red, then rushed into
his room to drink a glass of water, but he had no time to
reach the water-jug, and fainted in the midst of his dried
herbs. Five minutes after the new telegram reached the
minister, Debray had the horses put to his carriage, and
drove to Danglars' house.
"Has your husband any Spanish bonds?" he asked of the
baroness.
"I think so, indeed! He has six millions' worth."
"He must sell them at whatever price."
"Why?"
"Because Don Carlos has fled from Bourges, and has
returned to Spain."

"How do you know?" Debray shrugged his shoulders. "The
"Sir, my right-hand correspondent redoubles his signals; he idea of asking how I hear the news," he said. The baroness
is impatient."
did not wait for a repetition; she ran to her husband, who
"Never mind -- take these;" and the count placed the packet immediately hastened to his agent, and ordered him to sell
in the man's hands. "Now this is not all," he said; "you at any price. When it was seen that Danglars sold, the
Spanish funds fell directly. Danglars lost five hundred
cannot live upon your fifteen thousand francs."
thousand francs; but he rid himself of all his Spanish shares.
"I shall still have my place."
The same evening the following was read in Le
257


CHAPTER 61


HOW A GARDENER MAY GET RID OF THE DORMICE THAT EAT HIS PEACHES

Messager:

the peninsula is in the enjoyment of profound peace. A
telegraphic signal, improperly interpreted, owing to the fog,
was the cause of this error."

"[By telegraph.] The king, Don Carlos, has escaped the
vigilance of his guardians at Bourges, and has returned to
Spain by the Catalonian frontier. Barcelona has risen in his The funds rose one per cent higher than before they had
favor."
fallen. This, reckoning his loss, and what he had missed
gaining, made the difference of a million to Danglars.
All that evening nothing was spoken of but the foresight of
"Good," said Monte Cristo to Morrel, who was at his house
Danglars, who had sold his shares, and of the luck of the
when the news arrived of the strange reverse of fortune of
stock-jobber, who only lost five hundred thousand francs by
which Danglars's had been the victim, "I have just made a
such a blow. Those who had kept their shares, or bought
discovery for twenty-five thousand francs, for which I would
those of Danglars, looked upon themselves as ruined, and
have paid a hundred thousand."
passed a very bad night. Next morning Le Moniteur
contained the following:
"What have you discovered?" asked Morrel.
"It was without any foundation that Le Messager yesterday
announced the flight of Don Carlos and the revolt of
Barcelona. The king (Don Carlos) has not left Bourges, and

258

"I have just discovered how a gardener may get rid of the
dormice that eat his peaches."


Chapter 62

A

t first sight the exterior of the house at Auteuil gave no
indications of splendor, nothing one would expect from
the destined residence of the magnificent Count of Monte
Cristo; but this simplicity was according to the will of its
master, who positively ordered nothing to be altered outside.
The splendor was within. Indeed, almost before the door
opened, the scene changed. M. Bertuccio had outdone
himself in the taste displayed in furnishing, and in the
rapidity with which it was executed. It is told that the Duc
d'Antin removed in a single night a whole avenue of trees
that annoyed Louis XIV.; in three days M. Bertuccio planted
an entirely bare court with poplars, large spreading
sycamores to shade the different parts of the house, and in
the foreground, instead of the usual paving-stones, half
hidden by the grass, there extended a lawn but that morning
laid down, and upon which the water was yet glistening. For
the rest, the orders had been issued by the count; he himself
had given a plan to Bertuccio, marking the spot where each
tree was to be planted, and the shape and extent of the lawn
which was to take the place of the paving-stones. Thus the
house had become unrecognizable, and Bertuccio himself
declared that he scarcely knew it, encircled as it was by a
framework of trees. The overseer would not have objected,
while he was about it, to have made some improvements in
the garden, but the count had positively forbidden it to be
touched. Bertuccio made amends, however, by loading the
ante-chambers, staircases, and mantle-pieces with flowers.

Ghosts
cloth. One chamber alone had been respected by the
magnificent Bertuccio. Before this room, to which you could
ascend by the grand, and go out by the back staircase, the
servants passed with curiosity, and Bertuccio with terror. At
five o'clock precisely, the count arrived before the house at
Auteuil, followed by Ali. Bertuccio was awaiting this arrival
with impatience, mingled with uneasiness; he hoped for
some compliments, while, at the same time, he feared to
have frowns. Monte Cristo descended into the courtyard,
walked all over the house, without giving any sign of
approbation or pleasure, until he entered his bedroom,
situated on the opposite side to the closed room; then he
approached a little piece of furniture, made of rosewood,
which he had noticed at a previous visit. "That can only be to
hold gloves," he said.
"Will your excellency deign to open it?" said the delighted
Bertuccio, "and you will find gloves in it." Elsewhere the
count found everything he required -- smelling-bottles,
cigars, knick-knacks.

"Good," he said; and M. Bertuccio left enraptured, so great,
so powerful, and real was the influence exercised by this
man over all who surrounded him. At precisely six o'clock
the clatter of horses' hoofs was heard at the entrance door; it
was our captain of Spahis, who had arrived on Medeah. "I
am sure I am the first," cried Morrel; "I did it on purpose to
have you a minute to myself, before every one came. Julie
and Emmanuel have a thousand things to tell you. Ah, really
What, above all, manifested the shrewdness of the steward,
this is magnificent! But tell me, count, will your people take
and the profound science of the master, the one in carrying
care of my horse?"
out the ideas of the other, was that this house which
appeared only the night before so sad and gloomy, "Do not alarm yourself, my dear Maximilian -- they
impregnated with that sickly smell one can almost fancy to understand."
be the smell of time, had in a single day acquired the aspect "I mean, because he wants petting. If you had seen at what a
of life, was scented with its master's favorite perfumes, and pace he came -- like the wind!"
had the very light regulated according to his wish. When the
count arrived, he had under his touch his books and arms, "I should think so, -- a horse that cost 5,000 francs!" said
his eyes rested upon his favorite pictures; his dogs, whose Monte Cristo, in the tone which a father would use towards
caresses he loved, welcomed him in the ante-chamber; the a son.
birds, whose songs delighted him, cheered him with their "Do you regret them?" asked Morrel, with his open laugh.
music; and the house, awakened from it's long sleep, like the
"I? Certainly not," replied the count. "No; I should only
sleeping beauty in the wood, lived, sang, and bloomed like
regret if the horse had not proved good."
the houses we have long cherished, and in which, when we
are forced to leave them, we leave a part of our souls. The "It is so good, that I have distanced M. de Chateau-Renaud,
servants passed gayly along the fine court-yard; some, one of the best riders in France, and M. Debray, who both
belonging to the kitchens, gliding down the stairs, restored mount the minister's Arabians; and close on their heels are
but the previous day, as if they had always inhabited the the horses of Madame Danglars, who always go at six
house; others filling the coach-houses, where the equipages, leagues an hour."
encased and numbered, appeared to have been installed for "Then they follow you?" asked Monte Cristo.
the last fifty years; and in the stables the horses replied with
neighs to the grooms, who spoke to them with much more "See, they are here." And at the same minute a carriage with
smoking horses, accompanied by two mounted gentlemen,
respect than many servants pay their masters.
arrived at the gate, which opened before them. The carriage
The library was divided into two parts on either side of the drove round, and stopped at the steps, followed by the
wall, and contained upwards of two thousand volumes; one horsemen. The instant Debray had touched the ground, he
division was entirely devoted to novels, and even the was at the carriage-door. He offered his hand to the baroness,
volume which had been published but the day before was to who, descending, took it with a peculiarity of manner
be seen in its place in all the dignity of its red and gold imperceptible to every one but Monte Cristo. But nothing
binding. On the other side of the house, to match with the escaped the count's notice, and he observed a little note,
library, was the conservatory, ornamented with rare flowers, passed with the facility that indicates frequent practice, from
that bloomed in china jars; and in the midst of the the hand of Madame Danglars to that of the minister's
greenhouse, marvellous alike to sight and smell, was a secretary. After his wife the banker descended, as pale as
billiard-table which looked as if it had been abandoned though he had issued from his tomb instead of his carriage.
during the past hour by players who had left the balls on the Madame Danglars threw a rapid and inquiring glance which
259


CHAPTER 62

could only be interpreted by Monte Cristo, around the
court-yard, over the peristyle, and across the front of the
house, then, repressing a slight emotion, which must have
been seen on her countenance if she had not kept her color,
she ascended the steps, saying to Morrel, "Sir, if you were a
friend of mine, I should ask you if you would sell your
horse."

GHOSTS
splendid orange-tree, one after another. When he had
finished with the orange-tree, he began at the cactus; but this,
not being so easily plucked as the orange-tree, pricked him
dreadfully. He shuddered, and rubbed his eyes as though
awaking from a dream.

"Sir," said Monte Cristo to him, "I do not recommend my
pictures to you, who possess such splendid paintings; but,
Morrel smiled with an expression very like a grimace, and nevertheless, here are two by Hobbema, a Paul Potter, a
then turned round to Monte Cristo, as if to ask him to Mieris, two by Gerard Douw, a Raphael, a Vandyke, a
extricate him from his embarrassment. The count Zurbaran, and two or three by Murillo, worth looking at."
understood him. "Ah, madame," he said, "why did you not
"Stay," said Debray; "I recognize this Hobbema."
make that request of me?"
"Ah, indeed!"
"With you, sir," replied the baroness, "one can wish for
nothing, one is so sure to obtain it. If it were so with M. "Yes; it was proposed for the Museum."
Morrel" -"Which, I believe, does not contain one?" said Monte Cristo.
"Unfortunately," replied the count, "I am witness that M. "No; and yet they refused to buy it."
Morrel cannot give up his horse, his honor being engaged in
"Why?" said Chateau-Renaud.
keeping it."
"You pretend not to know, -- because government was not
"How so?"
rich enough."
"He laid a wager he would tame Medeah in the space of six
months. You understand now that if he were to get rid of the "Ah, pardon me," said Chateau-Renaud; "I have heard of
animal before the time named, he would not only lose his bet, these things every day during the last eight years, and I
but people would say he was afraid; and a brave captain of cannot understand them yet."
Spahis cannot risk this, even to gratify a pretty woman,
which is, in my opinion, one of the most sacred obligations
in the world."
"You see my position, madame," said Morrel, bestowing a
grateful smile on Monte Cristo.
"It seems to me," said Danglars, in his coarse tone,
ill-concealed by a forced smile, "that you have already got
horses enough." Madame Danglars seldom allowed remarks
of this kind to pass unnoticed, but, to the surprise of the
young people, she pretended not to hear it, and said nothing.
Monte Cristo smiled at her unusual humility, and showed
her two immense porcelain jars, over which wound marine
plants, of a size and delicacy that nature alone could produce.
The baroness was astonished. "Why," said she, "you could
plant one of the chestnut-trees in the Tuileries inside! How
can such enormous jars have been manufactured?"

"You will, by and by," said Debray.
"I think not," replied Chateau-Renaud.
"Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti and Count Andrea
Cavalcanti," announced Baptistin. A black satin stock, fresh
from the maker's hands, gray moustaches, a bold eye, a
major's uniform, ornamented with three medals and five
crosses -- in fact, the thorough bearing of an old soldier -such was the appearance of Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti,
that tender father with whom we are already acquainted.
Close to him, dressed in entirely new clothes, advanced
smilingly Count Andrea Cavalcanti, the dutiful son, whom
we also know. The three young people were talking together.
On the entrance of the new comers, their eyes glanced from
father to son, and then, naturally enough, rested on the latter,
whom they began criticising. "Cavalcanti!" said Debray. "A
fine name," said Morrel.

"Ah, madame," replied Monte Cristo, "you must not ask of "Yes," said Chateau-Renaud, "these Italians are well named
us, the manufacturers of fine porcelain, such a question. It is and badly dressed."
the work of another age, constructed by the genii of earth
"You are fastidious, Chateau-Renaud," replied Debray;
and water."
"those clothes are well cut and quite new."
"How so? -- at what period can that have been?"
"That is just what I find fault with. That gentleman appears
"I do not know; I have only heard that an emperor of China to be well dressed for the first time in his life."
had an oven built expressly, and that in this oven twelve jars
"Who are those gentlemen?" asked Danglars of Monte Cristo.
like this were successively baked. Two broke, from the heat
of the fire; the other ten were sunk three hundred fathoms "You heard -- Cavalcanti."
deep into the sea. The sea, knowing what was required of "That tells me their name, and nothing else."
her, threw over them her weeds, encircled them with coral,
and encrusted them with shells; the whole was cemented by "Ah, true. You do not know the Italian nobility; the
two hundred years beneath these almost impervious depths, Cavalcanti are all descended from princes."
for a revolution carried away the emperor who wished to "Have they any fortune?"
make the trial, and only left the documents proving the
"An enormous one."
manufacture of the jars and their descent into the sea. At the
end of two hundred years the documents were found, and "What do they do?"
they thought of bringing up the jars. Divers descended in
"Try to spend it all. They have some business with you, I
machines, made expressly on the discovery, into the bay
think, from what they told me the day before yesterday. I,
where they were thrown; but of ten three only remained, the
indeed, invited them here to-day on your account. I will
rest having been broken by the waves. I am fond of these jars,
introduce you to them."
upon which, perhaps, misshapen, frightful monsters have
fixed their cold, dull eyes, and in which myriads of small fish "But they appear to speak French with a very pure accent,"
have slept, seeking a refuge from the pursuit of their said Danglars.
enemies." Meanwhile, Danglars, who had cared little for "The son has been educated in a college in the south; I
curiosities, was mechanically tearing off the blossoms of a believe near Marseilles. You will find him quite
260

enthusiastic."
"Upon what subject?" asked Madame Danglars.
"The French ladies, madame. He has made up his mind to
take a wife from Paris."
"A fine idea that of his," said Danglars, shrugging his
shoulders. Madame Danglars looked at her husband with an
expression which, at any other time, would have indicated a
storm, but for the second time she controlled herself. "The
baron appears thoughtful to-day," said Monte Cristo to her;
"are they going to put him in the ministry?"
"Not yet, I think. More likely he has been speculating on the
Bourse, and has lost money."
"M. and Madame de Villefort," cried Baptistin. They entered.
M. de Villefort, notwithstanding his self-control, was visibly
affected, and when Monte Cristo touched his hand, he felt it
tremble. "Certainly, women alone know how to dissimulate,"
said Monte Cristo to himself, glancing at Madame Danglars,
who was smiling on the procureur, and embracing his wife.
After a short time, the count saw Bertuccio, who, until then,
had been occupied on the other side of the house, glide into
an adjoining room. He went to him. "What do you want, M.
Bertuccio?" said he.

"Waiting for whom?" Bertuccio, without answering, pointed
to Villefort with something of the gesture Macbeth uses to
point out Banquo. "Oh, oh," he at length muttered, "do you
see?"
"What? Who?"
"Him!"
"Him! -- M. de Villefort, the king's attorney? Certainly I see
him."
"Then I did not kill him?"
"Really, I think you are going mad, good Bertuccio," said the
count.
"Then he is not dead?"

"Ah, true."

"No; you see plainly he is not dead. Instead of striking
between the sixth and seventh left ribs, as your countrymen
do, you must have struck higher or lower, and life is very
tenacious in these lawyers, or rather there is no truth in
anything you have told me -- it was a fright of the
imagination, a dream of your fancy. You went to sleep full of
thoughts of vengeance; they weighed heavily upon your
stomach; you had the nightmare -- that's all. Come, calm
yourself, and reckon them up -- M. and Madame de Villefort,
two; M. and Madame Danglars, four; M. de Chateau-Renaud,
M. Debray, M. Morrel, seven; Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti,
eight."

"How many covers?"

"Eight!" repeated Bertuccio.

"Your excellency his not stated the number of guests."

"Count for yourself."

"Stop! You are in a shocking hurry to be off -- you forget one
of my guests. Lean a little to the left. Stay! look at M. Andrea
"Is every one here, your excellency?"
Cavalcanti, the young man in a black coat, looking at
"Yes."
Murillo's Madonna; now he is turning." This time Bertuccio
Bertuccio glanced through the door, which was ajar. The would have uttered an exclamation, had not a look from
Monte Cristo silenced him. "Benedetto?" he muttered;
count watched him. "Good heavens!" he exclaimed.
"fatality!"
"What is the matter?" said the count.
"Half-past six o'clock has just struck, M. Bertuccio," said the
"That woman -- that woman!"
count severely; "I ordered dinner at that hour, and I do not
like to wait;" and he returned to his guests, while Bertuccio,
"Which?"
leaning against the wall, succeeded in reaching the
"The one with a white dress and so many diamonds -- the
dining-room. Five minutes afterwards the doors of the.
fair one."
drawing-room were thrown open, and Bertuccio appearing
"Madame Danglars?"
said, with a violent effort, "The dinner waits."
"I do not know her name; but it is she, sir, it is she!"
"Whom do you mean?"
"The woman of the garden! -- she that was enciente -- she
who was walking while she waited for" -- Bertuccio stood at
the open door, with his eyes starting and his hair on end.

The Count of Monte Cristo offered his arm to Madame de
Villefort. "M. de Villefort," he said, "will you conduct the
Baroness Danglars?"
Villefort complied, and they passed on to the dining-room.

261


CHAPTER 63


Chapter 63

I

t was evident that one sentiment affected all the guests on
entering the dining-room. Each one asked what strange
influence had brought them to this house, and yet astonished,
even uneasy though they were, they still felt that they would
not like to be absent. The recent events, the solitary and
eccentric position of the count, his enormous, nay, almost
incredible fortune, should have made men cautious, and
have altogether prevented ladies visiting a house where
there was no one of their own sex to receive them; and yet
curiosity had been enough to lead them to overleap the
bounds of prudence and decorum. And all present, even
including Cavalcanti and his son, notwithstanding the
stiffness of the one and the carelessness of the other, were
thoughtful, on finding themselves assembled at the house of
this incomprehensible man. Madame Danglars had started
when Villefort, on the count's invitation, offered his arm; and
Villefort felt that his glance was uneasy beneath his gold
spectacles, when he felt the arm of the baroness press upon
his own. None of this had escaped the count, and even by
this mere contact of individuals the scene had already
acquired considerable interest for an observer. M. de
Villefort had on the right hand Madame Danglars, on his left
Morrel. The count was seated between Madame de Villefort
and Danglars; the other seats were filled by Debray, who
was placed between the two Cavalcanti, and by
Chateau-Renaud, seated between Madame de Villefort and
Morrel.

THE DINNER

The Dinner
these two fish; one brought fifty leagues beyond St.
Petersburg, the other five leagues from Naples. Is it not
amusing to see them both on the same table?"
"What are the two fish?" asked Danglars.
"M. Chateau-Renaud, who has lived in Russia, will tell you
the name of one, and Major Cavalcanti, who is an Italian,
will tell you the name of the other."
"This one is, I think, a sterlet," said Chateau-Renaud.
"And that one, if I mistake not, a lamprey."
"Just so. Now, M. Danglars, ask these gentlemen where they
are caught."
"Starlets," said Chateau-Renaud, "are only found in the
Volga."
"And," said Cavalcanti, "I know that Lake Fusaro alone
supplies lampreys of that size."
"Exactly; one comes from the Volga, and the other from Lake
Fusaro."
"Impossible!" cried all the guests simultaneously.

"Well, this is just what amuses me," said Monte Cristo. "I am
like Nero -- cupitor impossibilium; and that is what is
amusing you at this moment. This fish, which seems so
exquisite to you, is very likely no better than perch or
salmon; but it seemed impossible to procure it, and here it
The repast was magnificent; Monte Cristo had endeavored is."
completely to overturn the Parisian ideas, and to feed the "But how could you have these fish brought to France?"
curiosity as much as the appetite of his guests. It was an
"Oh, nothing more easy. Each fish was brought over in a
Oriental feast that he offered to them, but of such a kind as
cask -- one filled with river herbs and weeds, the other with
the Arabian fairies might be supposed to prepare. Every
rushes and lake plants; they were placed in a wagon built on
delicious fruit that the four quarters of the globe could
purpose, and thus the sterlet lived twelve days, the lamprey
provide was heaped in vases from China and jars from Japan.
eight, and both were alive when my cook seized them,
Rare birds, retaining their most brilliant plumage, enormous
killing one with milk and the other with wine. You do not
fish, spread upon massive silver dishes, together with every
believe me, M. Danglars!"
wine produced in the Archipelago, Asia Minor, or the Cape,
sparkling in bottles, whose grotesque shape seemed to give "I cannot help doubting," answered Danglars with his stupid
an additional flavor to the draught, -- all these, like one of smile.
the displays with which Apicius of old gratified his guests,
"Baptistin," said the count, "have the other fish brought in -passed in review before the eyes of the astonished Parisians,
the sterlet and the lamprey which came in the other casks,
who understood that it was possible to expend a thousand
and which are yet alive." Danglars opened his bewildered
louis upon a dinner for ten persons, but only on the
eyes; the company clapped their hands. Four servants
condition of eating pearls, like Cleopatra, or drinking refined
carried in two casks covered with aquatic plants, and in each
gold, like Lorenzo de' Medici.
of which was breathing a fish similar to those on the table.
Monte Cristo noticed the general astonishment, and began
"But why have two of each sort?" asked Danglars.
laughing and joking about it. "Gentlemen," he said, "you will
admit that, when arrived at a certain degree of fortune, the "Merely because one might have died," carelessly answered
superfluities of life are all that can be desired; and the ladies Monte Cristo.
will allow that, after having risen to a certain eminence of "You are certainly an extraordinary man," said Danglars;
position, the ideal alone can be more exalted. Now, to follow "and philosophers may well say it is a fine thing to be rich."
out this reasoning, what is the marvellous? -- that which we
do not understand. What is it that we really desire? -- that "And to have ideas," added Madame Danglars.
which we cannot obtain. Now, to see things which I cannot "Oh, do not give me credit for this, madame; it was done by
understand, to procure impossibilities, these are the study of the Romans, who much esteemed them, and Pliny relates
my life. I gratify my wishes by two means -- my will and my that they sent slaves from Ostia to Rome, who carried on
money. I take as much interest in the pursuit of some whim their heads fish which he calls the mulus, and which, from
as you do, M. Danglars, in promoting a new railway line; the description, must probably be the goldfish. It was also
you, M. de Villefort, in condemning a culprit to death; you, considered a luxury to have them alive, it being an amusing
M. Debray, in pacifying a kingdom; you, M. de sight to see them die, for, when dying, they change color
Chateau-Renaud, in pleasing a woman; and you, Morrel, in three or four times, and like the rainbow when it disappears,
breaking a horse that no one can ride. For example, you see pass through all the prismatic shades, after which they were
262

sent to the kitchen. Their agony formed part of their merit -if they were not seen alive, they were despised when dead."

"Can we account for instinct?" said Monte Cristo. "Are there
not some places where we seem to breathe sadness? -- why,
we cannot tell. It is a chain of recollections -- an idea which
"Yes," said Debray, "but then Ostia is only a few leagues
carries you back to other times, to other places -- which, very
from Rome."
likely, have no connection with the present time and place.
"True," said Monte Cristo; "but what would be the use of And there is something in this room which reminds me
living eighteen hundred years after Lucullus. if we can do no forcibly of the chamber of the Marquise de Ganges* or
better than he could?" The two Cavalcanti opened their Desdemona. Stay, since we have finished dinner, I will show
enormous eyes, but had the good sense not to say anything. it to you, and then we will take coffee in the garden. After
"All this is very extraordinary," said Chateau-Renaud; "still, dinner, the play." Monte Cristo looked inquiringly at his
what I admire the most, I confess, is the marvellous guests. Madame de Villefort rose, Monte Cristo did the same,
promptitude with which your orders are executed. Is it not and the rest followed their example. Villefort and Madame
true that you only bought this house five or six days ago?"
Danglars remained for a moment, as if rooted to their seats;
they questioned each other with vague and stupid glances.
"Certainly not longer."
"Did you hear?" said Madame Danglars.
"Well, I am sure it is quite transformed since last week. If I
remember rightly, it had another entrance, and the * Elisabeth de Rossan, Marquise de Ganges, was one of the
court-yard was paved and empty; while to-day we have a famous women of the court of Louis XIV. where she was
splendid lawn, bordered by trees which appear to be a known as "La Belle Provencale." She was the widow of the
Marquise de Castellane when she married de Ganges, and
hundred years old."
having the misfortune to excite the enmity of her new
"Why not? I am fond of grass and shade," said Monte Cristo. brothers-in-law, was forced by them to take poison; and they
"Yes," said Madame de Villefort, "the door was towards the finished her off with pistol and dagger. -- Ed.
road before, and on the day of my miraculous escape you "We must go," replied Villefort, offering his arm. The others,
brought me into the house from the road, I remember."
attracted by curiosity, were already scattered in different
"Yes, madame," said Monte Cristo; "but I preferred having parts of the house; for they thought the visit would not be
an entrance which would allow me to see the Bois de limited to the one room, and that, at the same time, they
would obtain a view of the rest of the building, of which
Boulogne over my gate."
Monte Cristo had created a palace. Each one went out by the
"In four days," said Morrel; "it is extraordinary!"
open doors. Monte Cristo waited for the two who remained;
"Indeed," said Chateau-Renaud, "it seems quite miraculous then, when they had passed, he brought up the rear, and on
to make a new house out of an old one; for it was very old, his face was a smile, which, if they could have understood it,
and dull too. I recollect coming for my mother to look at it would have alarmed them much more than a visit to the
when M. de Saint-Meran advertised it for sale two or three room they were about to enter. They began by walking
years ago."
through the apartments, many of which were fitted up in the
"M. de Saint-Meran?" said Madame de Villefort; "then this Eastern style, with cushions and divans instead of beds, and
house belonged to M. de Saint-Meran before you bought it?" pipes instead of furniture. The drawing-rooms were
decorated with the rarest pictures by the old masters, the
"It appears so," replied Monte Cristo.
boudoirs hung with draperies from China, of fanciful colors,
"Is it possible that you do not know of whom you purchased fantastic design, and wonderful texture. At length they
arrived at the famous room. There was nothing particular
it?"
about it, excepting that, although daylight had disappeared,
"Quite so; my steward transacts all this business for me."
it was not lighted, and everything in it was old-fashioned,
"It is certainly ten years since the house had been occupied," while the rest of the rooms had been redecorated. These two
said Chateau-Renaud, "and it was quite melancholy to look causes were enough to give it a gloomy aspect. "Oh." cried
at it, with the blinds closed, the doors locked, and the weeds Madame de Villefort, "it is really frightful." Madame
in the court. Really, if the house had not belonged to the Danglars tried to utter a few words, but was not heard.
father-in-law of the procureur, one might have thought it Many observations were made, the import of which was a
some accursed place where a horrible crime had been unanimous opinion that there was something sinister about
committed." Villefort, who had hitherto not tasted the three the room. "Is it not so?" asked Monte Cristo. "Look at that
or four glasses of rare wine which were placed before him, large clumsy bed, hung with such gloomy, blood-colored
here took one, and drank it off. Monte Cristo allowed a short drapery! And those two crayon portraits, that have faded
time to elapse, and then said, "It is singular, baron, but the from the dampness; do they not seem to say, with their pale
same idea came across me the first time I came here; it lips and staring eyes, `We have seen'?" Villefort became livid;
looked so gloomy I should never have bought it if my Madame Danglars fell into a long seat placed near the
steward had not taken the matter into his own hands. chimney. "Oh," said Madame de Villefort, smiling, "are you
Perhaps the fellow had been bribed by the notary."
courageous enough to sit down upon the very seat perhaps
upon which the crime was committed?" Madame Danglars
"It is probable," stammered out Villefort, trying to smile; "but
rose suddenly.
I can assure you that I had nothing to do with any such
proceeding. This house is part of Valentine's
marriage-portion, and M. de Saint-Meran wished to sell it;
"And then," said Monte Cristo, "this is not all."
for if it had remained another year or two uninhabited it
would have fallen to ruin." It was Morrel's turn to become "What is there more?" said Debray, who had not failed to
notice the agitation of Madame Danglars.
pale.
"There was, above all, one room," continued Monte Cristo,
"very plain in appearance, hung with red damask, which, I
know not why, appeared to me quite dramatic."

"Ah, what else is there?" said Danglars; "for, at present, I
cannot say that I have seen anything extraordinary. What do
you say, M. Cavalcanti?"

"Why so?" said Danglars; "why dramatic?"

"Ah," said he, "we have at Pisa, Ugolino's tower; at Ferrara,
263


CHAPTER 63


THE DINNER

Tasso's prison; at Rimini, the room of Francesca and Paolo."

from Leghorn to Florence. Monte Cristo seemed in despair.
He took the arm of Madame Danglars, and conducted her
"Yes, but you have not this little staircase," said Monte Cristo,
into the garden, where they found Danglars taking coffee
opening a door concealed by the drapery. "Look at it, and tell
between the Cavalcanti. "Really, madame," he said, "did I
me what you think of it."
alarm you much?"
"What a wicked-looking, crooked staircase," said
"Oh, no, sir," she answered; "but you know, things impress
Chateau-Renaud with a smile.
us differently, according to the mood of our minds." Villefort
"I do not know whether the wine of Chios produces forced a laugh. "And then, you know," he said, "an idea, a
melancholy, but certainly everything appears to me black in supposition, is sufficient."
this house," said Debray.
"Well," said Monte Cristo, "you may believe me if you like,
Ever since Valentine's dowry had been mentioned, Morrel but it is my opinion that a crime has been committed in this
had been silent and sad. "Can you imagine," said Monte house."
Cristo, "some Othello or Abbe de Ganges, one stormy, dark
"Take care," said Madame de Villefort, "the king's attorney is
night, descending these stairs step by step, carrying a load,
here."
which he wishes to hide from the sight of man, if not from
God?" Madame Danglars half fainted on the arm of Villefort, "Ah," replied Monte Cristo, "since that is the case, I will take
who was obliged to support himself against the wall. "Ah, advantage of his presence to make my declaration."
madame," cried Debray, "what is the matter with you? how
"Your declaration?" said Villefort.
pale you look!"
"Yes, before witnesses."
"It is very evident what is the matter with her," said Madame
de Villefort; "M. de Monte Cristo is relating horrible stories "Oh, this is very interesting," said Debray; "if there really has
been a crime, we will investigate it."
to us, doubtless intending to frighten us to death."
"Yes," said Villefort, "really, count, you frighten the ladies."
"What is the matter?" asked Debray, in a whisper, of
Madame Danglars.
"Nothing," she replied with a violent effort. "I want air, that
is all."
"Will you come into the garden?" said Debray, advancing
towards the back staircase.
"No, no," she answered, "I would rather remain here."
"Are you really frightened, madame?" said Monte Cristo.
"Oh, no, sir," said Madame Danglars; "but you suppose
scenes in a manner which gives them the appearance of
reality "
"Ah, yes," said Monte Cristo smiling; "it is all a matter of
imagination. Why should we not imagine this the apartment
of an honest mother? And this bed with red hangings, a bed
visited by the goddess Lucina? And that mysterious staircase,
the passage through which, not to disturb their sleep, the
doctor and nurse pass, or even the father carrying the
sleeping child?" Here Madame Danglars, instead of being
calmed by the soft picture, uttered a groan and fainted.
"Madame Danglars is ill," said Villefort; "it would be better
to take her to her carriage."

"There has been a crime," said Monte Cristo. "Come this way,
gentlemen; come, M. Villefort, for a declaration to be
available, should be made before the competent authorities."
He then took Villefort's arm, and, at the same time, holding
that of Madame Danglars under his own, he dragged the
procureur to the plantain-tree, where the shade was thickest.
All the other guests followed. "Stay," said Monte Cristo,
"here, in this very spot" (and he stamped upon the ground),
"I had the earth dug up and fresh mould put in, to refresh
these old trees; well, my man, digging, found a box, or rather,
the iron-work of a box, in the midst of which was the
skeleton of a newly born infant." Monte Cristo felt the arm of
Madame Danglars stiffen, while that of Villefort trembled.
"A newly born infant," repeated Debray; "this affair becomes
serious!"
"Well," said Chateau-Renaud, "I was not wrong just now
then, when I said that houses had souls and faces like men,
and that their exteriors carried the impress of their characters.
This house was gloomy because it was remorseful: it was
remorseful because it concealed a crime."
"Who said it was a crime?" asked Villefort, with a last effort.
"How? is it not a crime to bury a living child in a garden?"
cried Monte Cristo. "And pray what do you call such an
action?"

"Oh, mon Dieu," said Monte Cristo, "and I have forgotten my "But who said it was buried alive?"
smelling-bottle!"
"Why bury it there if it were dead? This garden has never
"I have mine," said Madame de Villefort; and she passed been a cemetery."
over to Monte Cristo a bottle full of the same kind of red
"What is done to infanticides in this country?" asked Major
liquid whose good properties the count had tested on
Cavalcanti innocently.
Edward.
"Oh, their heads are soon cut off," said Danglars.
"Ah," said Monte Cristo, taking it from her hand.
"Ah, indeed?" said Cavalcanti.
"Yes," she said, "at your advice I have made the trial."
"I think so; am I not right, M. de Villefort?" asked Monte
"And have you succeeded?"
Cristo.
"I think so."
"Yes, count," replied Villefort, in a voice now scarcely
Madame Danglars was carried into the adjoining room; human.
Monte Cristo dropped a very small portion of the red liquid
Monte Cristo, seeing that the two persons for whom he had
upon her lips; she returned to consciousness. "Ah," she cried,
prepared this scene could scarcely endure it, and not
"what a frightful dream!"
wishing to carry it too far, said, "Come, gentlemen, -- some
Villefort pressed her hand to let her know it was not a dream. coffee, we seem to have forgotten it," and he conducted the
They looked for M. Danglars, but, as he was not especially guests back to the table on the lawn.
interested in poetical ideas, he had gone into the garden, and
"Indeed, count," said Madame Danglars, "I am ashamed to
was talking with Major Cavalcanti on the projected railway
264

own it, but all your frightful stories have so upset me, that I
must beg you to let me sit down;" and she fell into a chair.
Monte Cristo bowed, and went to Madame de Villefort. "I
think Madame Danglars again requires your bottle," he said.
But before Madame de Villefort could reach her friend the
procureur had found time to whisper to Madame Danglars,
"I must speak to you."
"When?"

"To-morrow."
"Where?"
"In my office, or in the court, if you like, -- that is the surest
place."
"I will be there." -- At this moment Madame de Villefort
approached. "Thanks, my dear friend," said Madame
Danglars, trying to smile; "it is over now, and I am much
better."

265


CHAPTER 64


Chapter 64

T

he evening passed on; Madame de Villefort expressed a
desire to return to Paris, which Madame Danglars had
not dared to do, notwithstanding the uneasiness she
experienced. On his wife's request, M. de Villefort was the
first to give the signal of departure. He offered a seat in his
landau to Madame Danglars, that she might be under the
care of his wife. As for M. Danglars, absorbed in an
interesting conversation with M. Cavalcanti, he paid no
attention to anything that was passing. While Monte Cristo
had begged the smelling-bottle of Madame de Villefort, he
had noticed the approach of Villefort to Madame Danglars,
and he soon guessed all that had passed between them,
though the words had been uttered in so low a voice as
hardly to be heard by Madame Danglars. Without opposing
their arrangements, he allowed Morrel, Chateau-Renaud,
and Debray to leave on horseback, and the ladies in M. de
Villefort's carriage. Danglars, more and more delighted with
Major Cavalcanti, had offered him a seat in his carriage.
Andrea Cavalcanti found his tilbury waiting at the door; the
groom, in every respect a caricature of the English fashion,
was standing on tiptoe to hold a large iron-gray horse.

THE BEGGAR

The Beggar
difficult for them to leave separately. The major seated
himself, therefore, by the side of Danglars, who was more
and more charmed with the ideas of order and economy
which ruled this man, and yet who, being able to allow his
son 60,000 francs a year, might be supposed to possess a
fortune of 500,000 or 600,000 livres.

As for Andrea, he began, by way of showing off, to scold his
groom, who, instead of bringing the tilbury to the steps of
the house, had taken it to the outer door, thus giving him the
trouble of walking thirty steps to reach it. The groom heard
him with humility, took the bit of the impatient animal with
his left hand, and with the right held out the reins to Andrea,
who, taking them from him, rested his polished boot lightly
on the step. At that moment a hand touched his shoulder.
The young man turned round, thinking that Danglars or
Monte Cristo had forgotten something they wished to tell
him, and had returned just as they were starting. But instead
of either of these, he saw nothing but a strange face,
sunburnt, and encircled by a beard, with eyes brilliant as
carbuncles, and a smile upon the mouth which displayed a
perfect set of white teeth, pointed and sharp as the wolf's or
Andrea had spoken very little during dinner; he was an jackal's. A red handkerchief encircled his gray head; torn and
intelligent lad, and he feared to utter some absurdity before filthy garments covered his large bony limbs, which seemed
so many grand people, amongst whom, with dilating eyes, as though, like those of a skeleton, they would rattle as he
he saw the king's attorney. Then he had been seized upon by walked; and the hand with which he leaned upon the young
Danglars, who, with a rapid glance at the stiff-necked old man's shoulder, and which was the first thing Andrea saw,
major and his modest son, and taking into consideration the seemed of gigantic size. Did the young man recognize that
hospitality of the count, made up his mind that he was in the face by the light of the lantern in his tilbury, or was he
society of some nabob come to Paris to finish the worldly merely struck with the horrible appearance of his
education of his heir. He contemplated with unspeakable interrogator? We cannot say; but only relate the fact that he
delight the large diamond which shone on the major's little shuddered and stepped back suddenly. "What do you want
finger; for the major, like a prudent man, in case of any of me?" he asked.
accident happening to his bank-notes, had immediately
"Pardon me, my friend, if I disturb you," said the man with
converted them into an available asset. Then, after dinner, on
the red handkerchief, "but I want to speak to you."
the pretext of business, he questioned the father and son
upon their mode of living; and the father and son, "You have no right to beg at night," said the groom,
previously informed that it was through Danglars the one endeavoring to rid his master of the troublesome intruder.
was to receive his 48,000 francs and the other 50,000 livres "I am not begging, my fine fellow," said the unknown to the
annually, were so full of affability that they would have servant, with so ironical an expression of the eye, and so
shaken hands even with the banker's servants, so much did frightful a smile, that he withdrew; "I only wish to say two or
their gratitude need an object to expend itself upon. One three words to your master, who gave me a commission to
thing above all the rest heightened the respect, nay almost execute about a fortnight ago."
the veneration, of Danglars for Cavalcanti. The latter, faithful
to the principle of Horace, nil admirari, had contented "Come," said Andrea, with sufficient nerve for his servant
himself with showing his knowledge by declaring in what not to perceive his agitation, "what do you want? Speak
lake the best lampreys were caught. Then he had eaten some quickly, friend."
without saying a word more; Danglars, therefore, concluded The man said, in a low voice: "I wish -- I wish you to spare
that such luxuries were common at the table of the me the walk back to Paris. I am very tired, and as I have not
illustrious descendant of the Cavalcanti, who most likely in eaten so good a dinner as you, I can scarcely stand." The
Lucca fed upon trout brought from Switzerland, and lobsters young man shuddered at this strange familiarity. "Tell me,"
sent from England, by the same means used by the count to he said -- "tell me what you want?"
bring the lampreys from Lake Fusaro, and the sterlet from
"Well, then, I want you to take me up in your fine carriage,
the Volga. Thus it was with much politeness of manner that
and carry me back." Andrea turned pale, but said nothing.
he heard Cavalcanti pronounce these words, "To-morrow, sir,
"Yes," said the man, thrusting his hands into his pockets, and
I shall have the honor of waiting upon you on business."
looking impudently at the youth; "I have taken the whim
"And I, sir," said Danglars, "shall be most happy to receive
into my head; do you understand, Master Benedetto?"
you." Upon which he offered to take Cavalcanti in his
carriage to the Hotel des Princes, if it would not be depriving At this name, no doubt, the young man reflected a little, for
him of the company of his son. To this Cavalcanti replied by he went towards his groom, saying, "This man is right; I did
saying that for some time past his son had lived indeed charge him with a commission, the result of which he
independently of him, that he had his own horses and must tell me; walk to the barrier, there take a cab, that you
carriages, and that not having come together, it would not be may not be too late." The surprised groom retired. "Let me at
266

least reach a shady spot," said Andrea.
"Oh, as for that, I'll take you to a splendid place," said the
man with the handkerchief; and taking the horse's bit he led
the tilbury where it was certainly impossible for any one to
witness the honor that Andrea conferred upon him.

"You do not speak affectionately to me, Benedetto, my old
friend, that is not right -- take care, or I may become
troublesome." This menace smothered the young man's
passion. He urged the horse again into a trot. "You should
not speak so to an old friend like me, Caderousse, as you
said just now; you are a native of Marseilles, I am" --

"Don't think I want the glory of riding in your fine carriage,"
"Do you know then now what you are?"
said he; "oh, no, it's only because I am tired, and also because
I have a little business to talk over with you."
"No, but I was brought up in Corsica; you are old and
obstinate, I am young and wilful. Between people like us
"Come, step in," said the young man. It was a pity this scene
threats are out of place, everything should be amicably
had not occurred in daylight, for it was curious to see this
arranged. Is it my fault if fortune, which has frowned on you,
rascal throwing himself heavily down on the cushion beside
has been kind to me?"
the young and elegant driver of the tilbury. Andrea drove
past the last house in the village without saying a word to "Fortune has been kind to you, then? Your tilbury, your
his companion, who smiled complacently, as though groom, your clothes, are not then hired? Good, so much the
well-pleased to find himself travelling in so comfortable a better," said Caderousse, his eyes sparkling with avarice.
vehicle. Once out of Auteuil, Andrea looked around, in
"Oh, you knew that well enough before speaking to me,"
order to assure himself that he could neither be seen nor
said Andrea, becoming more and more excited. "If I had
heard, and then, stopping the horse and crossing his arms
been wearing a handkerchief like yours on my head, rags on
before the man, he asked, -- "Now, tell me why you come to
my back, and worn-out shoes on my feet, you would not
disturb my tranquillity?"
have known me."
"Let me ask you why you deceived me?"
"You wrong me, my boy; now I have found you, nothing
"How have I deceived you?"
prevents my being as well-dressed as any one, knowing, as I
do, the goodness of your heart. If you have two coats you
"`How,' do you ask? When we parted at the Pont du Var,
will give me one of them. I used to divide my soup and
you told me you were going to travel through Piedmont and
beans with you when you were hungry."
Tuscany; but instead of that, you come to Paris."
"True," said Andrea.
"How does that annoy you?"
"What an appetite you used to have! Is it as good now?"
"It does not; on the contrary, I think it will answer my
purpose."
"Oh, yes," replied Andrea, laughing.
"So," said Andrea, "you are speculating upon me?"
"What fine words he uses!"
"I warn you, Master Caderousse, that you are mistaken."
"Well, well, don't be angry, my boy; you know well enough
what it is to be unfortunate; and misfortunes make us jealous.
I thought you were earning a living in Tuscany or Piedmont
by acting as facchino or cicerone, and I pitied you sincerely,
as I would a child of my own. You know I always did call
you my child."

"How did you come to be dining with that prince whose
house you have just left?"
"He is not a prince; simply a count."
"A count, and a rich one too, eh?"
"Yes; but you had better not have anything to say to him, for
he is not a very good-tempered gentleman."

"Come, come, what then?"

"Oh, be easy! I have no design upon your count, and you
shall have him all to yourself. But," said Caderousse, again
smiling with the disagreeable expression he had before
assumed, "you must pay for it -- you understand?"

"Patience -- patience!"

"Well, what do you want?"

"I am patient, but go on."

"I think that with a hundred francs a month" --

"All at once I see you pass through the barrier with a groom, "Well?"
a tilbury, and fine new clothes. You must have discovered a
"I could live" -mine, or else become a stockbroker."
"Upon a hundred francs!"
"So that, as you confess, you are jealous?"
"Come -- you understand me; but that with" -"No, I am pleased -- so pleased that I wished to congratulate
you; but as I am not quite properly dressed, I chose my "With?"
opportunity, that I might not compromise you."
"With a hundred and fifty francs I should be quite happy."
"Yes, and a fine opportunity you have chosen!" exclaimed
Andrea; "you speak to me before my servant."

"Here are two hundred," said Andrea; and he placed ten
gold louis in the hand of Caderousse.

"How can I help that, my boy? I speak to you when I can "Good!" said Caderousse.
catch you. You have a quick horse, a light tilbury, you are
naturally as slippery as an eel; if I had missed you to-night, I "Apply to the steward on the first day of every mouth, and
you will receive the same sum."
might not have had another chance."
"There now, again you degrade me."
"You see, I do not conceal myself."
"You are lucky; I wish I could say as much, for I do conceal "How so?"
myself; and then I was afraid you would not recognize me, "By making me apply to the servants, when I want to
but you did," added Caderousse with his unpleasant smile. transact business with you alone."
"It was very polite of you."
"Well, be it so, then. Take it from me then, and so long at
"Come," said Andrea, "what do want?"
least as I receive my income, you shall be paid yours."
267


CHAPTER 64


THE BEGGAR

"Come, come; I always said you were a line fellow, and it is a before -- making in all about two hundred francs, -- why, I
blessing when good fortune happens to such as you. But tell should certainly be arrested at the barriers. Then, to justify
me all about it?"
myself, I should say that you gave me the money; this would
cause inquiries, it would be found that I left Toulon without
"Why do you wish to know?" asked Cavalcanti.
giving due notice, and I should then be escorted back to the
"What? do you again defy me?"
shores of the Mediterranean. Then I should become simply
No. 106, and good-by to my dream of resembling the retired
"No; the fact is, I have found my father."
baker! No, no, my boy; I prefer remaining honorably in the
"What? a real father?"
capital." Andrea scowled. Certainly, as he had himself
owned, the reputed son of Major Cavalcanti was a wilful
"Yes, so long as he pays me" -fellow. He drew up for a minute, threw a rapid glance
"You'll honor and believe him -- that's right. What is his
around him, and then his hand fell instantly into his pocket,
name?"
where it began playing with a pistol. But, meanwhile,
"Major Cavalcanti."
Caderousse, who had never taken his eyes off his companion,
passed his hand behind his back, and opened a long Spanish
"Is he pleased with you?"
knife, which he always carried with him, to be ready in case
"So far I have appeared to answer his purpose."
of need. The two friends, as we see, were worthy of and
understood one another. Andrea's hand left his pocket
"And who found this father for you?"
inoffensively, and was carried up to the red mustache, which
"The Count of Monte Cristo."
it played with for some time. "Good Caderousse," he said,
"The man whose house you have just left?"
"how happy you will be."
"Yes."
"I wish you would try and find me a situation with him as
grandfather, since he holds the money-chest!"
"Well, I will mention you to him. Meanwhile, what are you
going to do?"
"I?"
"Yes, you."
"It is very kind of you to trouble yourself about me."
"Since you interest yourself in my affairs, I think it is now
my turn to ask you some questions."

"I will do my best," said the inn-keeper of the Pont du Gard,
shutting up his knife.
"Well, then, we will go into Paris. But how will you pass
through the barrier without exciting suspicion? It seems to
me that you are in more danger riding than on foot."
"Wait," said Caderousse, "we shall see." He then took the
great-coat with the large collar, which the groom had left
behind in the tilbury, and put it on his back; then he took off
Cavalcanti's hat, which he placed upon his own head, and
finally he assumed the careless attitude of a servant whose
master drives himself.

"But, tell me," said Andrea, "am I to remain bareheaded?"
"Ah, true. Well; I shall rent a room in some respectable house,
wear a decent coat, shave every day, and go and read the "Pooh," said Caderousse; "it is so windy that your hat can
papers in a cafe. Then, in the evening, I shall go to the theatre; easily appear to have blown off."
I shall look like some retired baker. That is what I want."
"Come, come; enough of this," said Cavalcanti.
"Come, if you will only put this scheme into execution, and "What are you waiting for?" said Caderousse. "I hope I am
be steady, nothing could be better."
not the cause."
"Do you think so, M. Bossuet? And you -- what will you
become? A peer of France?"
"Ah," said Andrea, "who knows?"
"Major Cavalcanti is already one, perhaps; but then,
hereditary rank is abolished."
"No politics, Caderousse. And now that you have all you
want, and that we understand each other, jump down from
the tilbury and disappear."
"Not at all, my good friend."
"How? Not at all?"
"Why, just think for a moment; with this red handkerchief on
my head, with scarcely any shoes, no papers, and ten gold
napoleons in my pocket, without reckoning what was there

268

"Hush," said Andrea. They passed the barrier without
accident. At the first cross street Andrea stopped his horse,
and Caderousse leaped out.
"Well!" said Andrea, -- "my servant's coat and my hat?"
"Ah," said Caderousse, "you would not like me to risk taking
cold?"
"But what am I to do?"
"You? Oh, you are young while I am beginning to get old.
Au revoir, Benedetto;" and running into a court, he
disappeared. "Alas," said Andrea, sighing, "one cannot be
completely happy in this world!"


Chapter 65

A Conjugal Scene

A

t the Place Louis XV. the three young people separated
-- that is to say, Morrel went to the Boulevards,
Chateau-Renaud to the Pont de la Revolution, and Debray to
the Quai. Most probably Morrel and Chateau-Renaud
returned to their "domestic hearths," as they say in the
gallery of the Chamber in well-turned speeches, and in the
theatre of the Rue Richelieu in well-written pieces; but it was
not the case with Debray. When he reached the wicket of the
Louvre, he turned to the left, galloped across the Carrousel,
passed through the Rue Saint-Roch, and, issuing from the
Rue de la Michodiere, he arrived at M. Danglars' door just at
the same time that Villefort's landau, after having deposited
him and his wife at the Faubourg St. Honore, stopped to
leave the baroness at her own house. Debray, with the air of
a man familiar with the house, entered first into the court,
threw his bridle into the hands of a footman, and returned to
the door to receive Madame Danglars, to whom he offered
his arm, to conduct her to her apartments. The gate once
closed, and Debray and the baroness alone in the court, he
asked, -- "What was the matter with you, Hermine? and why
were you so affected at that story, or rather fable, which the
count related?"
"Because I have been in such shocking spirits all the evening,
my friend," said the baroness.
"No, Hermine," replied Debray; "you cannot make me
believe that; on the contrary, you were in excellent spirits
when you arrived at the count's. M. Danglars was
disagreeable, certainly, but I know how much you care for
his ill-humor. Some one has vexed you; I will allow no one to
annoy you."

complaints, I think I heard Morcerf say that he could not
extract a word from his betrothed."
"True," said Madame Danglars; "yet I think this will all pass
off, and that you will one day see her enter your study."
"My study?"
"At least that of the minister."
"Why so!"
"To ask for an engagement at the Opera. Really, I never saw
such an infatuation for music; it is quite ridiculous for a
young lady of fashion." Debray smiled. "Well," said he, "let
her come, with your consent and that of the baron, and we
will try and give her an engagement, though we are very
poor to pay such talent as hers."
"Go, Cornelie," said Madame Danglars, "I do not require you
any longer."
Cornelie obeyed, and the next minute Madame Danglars left
her room in a charming loose dress, and came and sat down
close to Debray. Then she began thoughtfully to caress the
little spaniel. Lucien looked at her for a moment in silence.
"Come, Hermine," he said, after a short time, "answer
candidly, -- something vexes you -- is it not so?"
"Nothing," answered the baroness.

And yet, as she could scarcely breathe, she rose and went
towards a looking-glass. "I am frightful to-night," she said.
Debray rose, smiling, and was about to contradict the
baroness upon this latter point, when the door opened
suddenly. M. Danglars appeared; Debray reseated himself.
At the noise of the door Madame Danglars turned round,
"You are deceived, Lucien, I assure you," replied Madame
and looked upon her husband with an astonishment she
Danglars; "and what I have told you is really the case, added
took no trouble to conceal. "Good-evening, madame," said
to the ill-humor you remarked, but which I did not think it
the banker; "good-evening, M. Debray."
worth while to allude to." It was evident that Madame
Danglars was suffering from that nervous irritability which Probably the baroness thought this unexpected visit
women frequently cannot account for even to themselves; or signified a desire to make up for the sharp words he had
that, as Debray had guessed, she had experienced some uttered during the day. Assuming a dignified air, she turned
secret agitation that she would not acknowledge to any one. round to Debray, without answering her husband. "Read me
Being a man who knew that the former of these symptoms something, M. Debray," she said. Debray, who was slightly
was one of the inherent penalties of womanhood, he did not disturbed at this visit, recovered himself when he saw the
then press his inquiries, but waited for a more appropriate calmness of the baroness, and took up a book marked by a
opportunity when he should again interrogate her, or receive mother-of-pearl knife inlaid with gold. "Excuse me," said the
an avowal proprio motu. At the door of her apartment the banker, "but you will tire yourself, baroness, by such late
baroness met Mademoiselle Cornelie, her confidential maid. hours, and M. Debray lives some distance from here."
"What is my daughter doing?" asked Madame Danglars.
Debray was petrified, not only to hear Danglars speak so
"She practiced all the evening, and then went to bed," replied calmly and politely, but because it was apparent that
beneath outward politeness there really lurked a determined
Mademoiselle Cornelie.
spirit of opposition to anything his wife might wish to do.
"Yet I think I hear her piano."
The baroness was also surprised, and showed her
"It is Mademoiselle Louise d'Armilly, who is playing while astonishment by a look which would doubtless have had
Mademoiselle Danglars is in bed."
some effect upon her husband if he had not been intently
"Well," said Madame Danglars, "come and undress me." occupied with the paper, where he was looking to see the
They entered the bedroom. Debray stretched himself upon a closing stock quotations. The result was, that the proud look
large couch, and Madame Danglars passed into her entirely failed of its purpose.
dressing-room with Mademoiselle Cornelie. "My dear M.
Lucien," said Madame Danglars through the door, "you are
always complaining that Eugenie will not address a word to
you."

"M. Lucien," said the baroness, "I assure you I have no desire
to sleep, and that I have a thousand things to tell you this
evening, which you must listen to, even though you slept
while hearing me."

"Madame," said Lucien, playing with a little dog, who, "I am at your service, madame," replied Lucien coldly.
recognizing him as a friend of the house, expected to be
"My dear M. Debray," said the banker, "do not kill yourself
caressed, "I am not the only one who makes similar
269


CHAPTER 65


A CONJUGAL SCENE

to-night listening to the follies of Madame Danglars, for you
can hear them as well to-morrow; but I claim to-night and
will devote it, if you will allow me, to talk over some serious
matters with my wife." This time the blow was so well aimed,
and hit so directly, that Lucien and the baroness were
staggered, and they interrogated each other with their eyes,
as if to seek help against this aggression, but the irresistible
will of the master of the house prevailed, and the husband
was victorious.
"Do not think I wish to turn you out, my dear Debray,"
continued Danglars; "oh, no, not at all. An unexpected
occurrence forces me to ask my wife to have a little
conversation with me; it is so rarely I make such a request, I
am sure you cannot grudge it to me." Debray muttered
something, bowed and went out, knocking himself against
the edge of the door, like Nathan in "Athalie."

"Certainly it is not mine."
"Once for all, sir," replied the baroness sharply, "I tell you I
will not hear cash named; it is a style of language I never
heard in the house of my parents or in that of my first
husband."
"Oh, I can well believe that, for neither of them was worth a
penny."
"The better reason for my not being conversant with the
slang of the bank, which is here dinning in my ears from
morning to night; that noise of jingling crowns, which are
constantly being counted and re-counted, is odious to me. I
only know one thing I dislike more, which is the sound of
your voice."
"Really?" said Danglars. "Well, this surprises me, for I
thought you took the liveliest interest in all my affairs!"

"It is extraordinary," he said, when the door was closed "I? What could put such an idea into your head?"
behind him, "how easily these husbands, whom we ridicule,
"Yourself."
gain an advantage over us."
Lucien having left, Danglars took his place on the sofa, "Ah? -- what next?"
closed the open book, and placing himself in a dreadfully
dictatorial attitude, he began playing with the dog; but the
animal, not liking him as well as Debray, and attempting to
bite him, Danglars seized him by the skin of his neck and
threw him upon a couch on the other side of the room. The
animal uttered a cry during the transit, but, arrived at its
destination, it crouched behind the cushions, and stupefied
at such unusual treatment remained silent and motionless.
"Do you know, sir," asked the baroness, "that you are
improving? Generally you are only rude, but to-night you
are brutal."

"Most assuredly."
"I should like to know upon what occasion?"

"Oh, mon Dieu, that is very easily done. Last February you
were the first who told me of the Haitian funds. You had
dreamed that a ship had entered the harbor at Havre, that
this ship brought news that a payment we had looked upon
as lost was going to be made. I know how clear-sighted your
dreams are; I therefore purchased immediately as many
shares as I could of the Haitian debt, and I gained 400,000
francs by it, of which 100,000 have been honestly paid to you.
You spent it as you pleased; that was your business. In
"It is because I am in a worse humor than usual," replied
March there was a question about a grant to a railway. Three
Danglars. Hermine looked at the banker with supreme
companies presented themselves, each offering equal
disdain. These glances frequently exasperated the pride of
securities. You told me that your instinct, -- and although
Danglars, but this evening he took no notice of them.
you pretend to know nothing about speculations, I think on
"And what have I to do with your ill-humor?" said the the contrary, that your comprehension is very clear upon
baroness, irritated at the impassibility of her husband; "do certain affairs, -- well, you told me that your instinct led you
these things concern me? Keep your ill-humor at home in to believe the grant would be given to the company called
your money boxes, or, since you have clerks whom you pay, the Southern. I bought two thirds of the shares of that
vent it upon them."
company; as you had foreseen, the shares trebled in value,
"Not so," replied Danglars; "your advice is wrong, so I shall and I picked up a million, from which 250,000 francs were
not follow it. My money boxes are my Pactolus, as, I think, paid to you for pin-money. How have you spent this 250,000
M. Demoustier says, and I will not retard its course, or francs? -- it is no business of mine."
disturb its calm. My clerks are honest men, who earn my "When are you coming to the point?" cried the baroness,
fortune, whom I pay much below their deserts, if I may shivering with anger and impatience.
value them according to what they bring in; therefore I shall
"Patience, madame, I am coming to it."
not get into a passion with them; those with whom I will be
in a passion are those who eat my dinners, mount my horses, "That's fortunate."
and exhaust my fortune."
"In April you went to dine at the minister's. You heard a
private conversation respecting Spanish affairs -- on the
expulsion of Don Carlos. I bought some Spanish shares. The
expulsion took place and I pocketed 600,000 francs the day
"Oh, make yourself easy! -- I am not speaking riddles, and
Charles V. repassed the Bidassoa. Of these 600,000 francs
you will soon know what I mean. The people who exhaust
you took 50,000 crowns. They were yours, you disposed of
my fortune are those who draw out 700,000 francs in the
them according to your fancy, and I asked no questions; but
course of an hour."
it is not the less true that you have this year received 500,000
"I do not understand you, sir," said the baroness, trying to livres."
disguise the agitation of her voice and the flush of her face.
"Well, sir, and what then?"
"You understand me perfectly, on the contrary," said
Danglars: "but, if you will persist, I will tell you that I have "Ah, yes, it was just after this that you spoiled everything."
just lost 700,000 francs upon the Spanish loan."
"Really, your manner of speaking" -"And pray who are the persons who exhaust your fortune?
Explain yourself more clearly, I beg, sir."

"And pray," asked the baroness, "am I responsible for this
loss?"
"Why not?"
"Is it my fault you have lost 700,000 francs?"
270

"It expresses my meaning, and that is all I want. Well, three
days after that you talked politics with M. Debray, and you
fancied from his words that Don Carlos had returned to
Spain. Well, I sold my shares, the news got out, and I no
longer sold -- I gave them away, next day I find the news

was false, and by this false report I have lost 700,000 francs."
"Well?"
"Well, since I gave you a fourth of my gains, I think you owe
me a fourth of my losses; the fourth of 700,000 francs is
175,000 francs."
"What you say is absurd, and I cannot see why M. Debray's
name is mixed up in this affair."
"Because if you do not possess the 175,000 francs I reclaim,
you must have lent them to your friends, and M. Debray is
one of your friends."
"For shame!" exclaimed the baroness.
"Oh, let us have no gestures, no screams, no modern drama,
or you will oblige me to tell you that I see Debray leave here,
pocketing the whole of the 500,000 livres you have handed
over to him this year, while he smiles to himself, saying that
he has found what the most skilful players have never
discovered -- that is, a roulette where he wins without
playing, and is no loser when he loses." The baroness became
enraged. "Wretch!" she cried, "will you dare to tell me you
did not know what you now reproach me with?"
"I do not say that I did know it, and I do not say that I did
not know it. I merely tell you to look into my conduct during
the last four years that we have ceased to be husband and
wife, and see whether it has not always been consistent.
Some time after our rupture, you wished to study music,
under the celebrated baritone who made such a successful
appearance at the Theatre Italien; at the same time I felt
inclined to learn dancing of the danseuse who acquired such
a reputation in London. This cost me, on your account and
mine, 100,000 francs. I said nothing, for we must have peace
in the house; and 100,000 francs for a lady and gentleman to
be properly instructed in music and dancing are not too
much. Well, you soon become tired of singing, and you take
a fancy to study diplomacy with the minister's secretary.
You understand, it signifies nothing to me so long as you
pay for your lessons out of your own cashbox. But to-day I
find you are drawing on mine, and that your apprenticeship
may cost me 700,000 francs per month. Stop there, madame,
for this cannot last. Either the diplomatist must give his
lessons gratis, and I will tolerate him, or he must never set
his foot again in my house; -- do you understand, madame?"
"Oh, this is too much," cried Hermine, choking, "you are
worse than despicable."

had not escaped by flight, which proves that he was either
mad or guilty? It was a mistake."
"Yes, which made fools laugh, which caused the minister to
have a sleepless night, which has caused the minister's
secretaries to blacken several sheets of paper, but which has
cost me 700,000 francs."
"But, sir," said Hermine suddenly, "if all this is, as you say,
caused by M. Debray, why, instead of going direct to him, do
you come and tell me of it? Why, to accuse the man, do you
address the woman?"
"Do I know M. Debray? -- do I wish to know him? -- do I
wish to know that he gives advice? -- do I wish to follow it?
-- do I speculate? No; you do all this, not I."
"Still it seems to me, that as you profit by it -- "
Danglars shrugged his shoulders. "Foolish creature," he
exclaimed. "Women fancy they have talent because they
have managed two or three intrigues without being the talk
of Paris! But know that if you had even hidden your
irregularities from your husband, who has but the
commencement of the art -- for generally husbands will not
see -- you would then have been but a faint imitation of most
of your friends among the women of the world. But it has
not been so with me, -- I see, and always have seen, during
the last sixteen years. You may, perhaps, have hidden a
thought; but not a step, not an action, not a fault, has
escaped me, while you flattered yourself upon your address,
and firmly believed you had deceived me. What has been the
result? -- that, thanks to my pretended ignorance, there is
none of your friends, from M. de Villefort to M. Debray, who
has not trembled before me. There is not one who has not
treated me as the master of the house, -- the only title I desire
with respect to you; there is not one, in fact, who would have
dared to speak of me as I have spoken of them this day. I
will allow you to make me hateful, but I will prevent your
rendering me ridiculous, and, above all, I forbid you to ruin
me."
The baroness had been tolerably composed until the name of
Villefort had been pronounced; but then she became pale,
and, rising, as if touched by a spring, she stretched out her
hands as though conjuring an apparition; she then took two
or three steps towards her husband, as though to tear the
secret from him, of which he was ignorant, or which he
withheld from some odious calculation, -- odious, as all his
calculations were. "M. de Villefort! -- What do you mean?"

"But," continued Danglars, "I find you did not even pause "I mean that M. de Nargonne, your first husband, being
there" -neither a philosopher nor a banker, or perhaps being both,
and seeing there was nothing to be got out of a king's
"Insults!"
attorney, died of grief or anger at finding, after an absence of
"You are right; let us leave these facts alone, and reason nine months, that you had been enceinte six. I am brutal, -- I
coolly. I have never interfered in your affairs excepting for not only allow it, but boast of it; it is one of the reasons of my
your good; treat me in the same way. You say you have success in commercial business. Why did he kill himself
nothing to do with my cash-box. Be it so. Do as you like with instead of you? Because he had no cash to save. My life
your own, but do not fill or empty mine. Besides, how do I belongs to my cash. M. Debray has made me lose 700,000
know that this was not a political trick, that the minister francs; let him bear his share of the loss, and we will go on as
enraged at seeing me in the opposition, and jealous of the before; if not, let him become bankrupt for the 250,000 livres,
popular sympathy I excite, has not concerted with M. and do as all bankrupts do -- disappear. He is a charming
Debray to ruin me?"
fellow, I allow, when his news is correct; but when it is not,
there are fifty others in the world who would do better than
"A probable thing!"
he."
"Why not? Who ever heard of such an occurrence as this? -- a
false telegraphic despatch -- it is almost impossible for Madame Danglars was rooted to the spot; she made a violent
wrong signals to be made as they were in the last two effort to reply to this last attack, but she fell upon a chair
thinking of Villefort, of the dinner scene, of the strange series
telegrams. It was done on purpose for me -- I am sure of it."
of misfortunes which had taken place in her house during
"Sir," said the baroness humbly, "are you not aware that the
the last few days, and changed the usual calm of her
man employed there was dismissed, that they talked of
establishment to a scene of scandalous debate. Danglars did
going to law with him, that orders were issued to arrest him
not even look at her, though she did her best to faint. He
and that this order would have been put into execution if he
271


CHAPTER 65


A CONJUGAL SCENE

shut the bedroom door after him, without adding another Danglars recovered from her half-fainting condition, she
word, and returned to his apartments; and when Madame could almost believe that she had had a disagreeable dream.

272


Chapter 66

Matrimonial Projects

T

he day following this scene, at the hour the banker
usually chose to pay a visit to Madame Danglars on his
way to his office, his coupe did not appear. At this time, that
is, about half-past twelve, Madame Danglars ordered her
carriage, and went out. Danglars, hidden behind a curtain,
watched the departure he had been waiting for. He gave
orders that he should be informed as soon as Madame
Danglars appeared; but at two o'clock she had not returned.
He then called for his horses, drove to the Chamber, and
inscribed his name to speak against the budget. From twelve
to two o'clock Danglars had remained in his study, unsealing
his dispatches, and becoming more and more sad every
minute, heaping figure upon figure, and receiving, among
other visits, one from Major Cavalcanti, who, as stiff and
exact as ever, presented himself precisely at the hour named
the night before, to terminate his business with the banker.
On leaving the Chamber, Danglars, who had shown violent
marks of agitation during the sitting, and been more bitter
than ever against the ministry, re-entered his carriage, and
told the coachman to drive to the Avenue des
Champs-Elysees, No. 30.
Monte Cristo was at home; only he was engaged with some
one and begged Danglars to wait for a moment in the
drawing-room. While the banker was waiting in the
anteroom, the door opened, and a man dressed as an abbe
and doubtless more familiar with the house than he was,
came in and instead of waiting, merely bowed, passed on to
the farther apartments, and disappeared. A minute after the
door by which the priest had entered reopened, and Monte
Cristo appeared. "Pardon me," said he, "my dear baron, but
one of my friends, the Abbe Busoni, whom you perhaps saw
pass by, has just arrived in Paris; not having seen him for a
long time, I could not make up my mind to leave him sooner,
so I hope this will be sufficient reason for my having made
you wait."

this month. To-day is the 30th. I present them; but my
correspondent has disappeared. This, with my Spanish
affairs, made a pretty end to the month."
"Then you really lost by that affair in Spain?"
"Yes; only 700,000 francs out of my cash-box -- nothing
more!"
"Why, how could you make such a mistake -- such an old
stager?"
"Oh, it is all my wife's fault. She dreamed Don Carlos had
returned to Spain; she believes in dreams. It is magnetism,
she says, and when she dreams a thing it is sure to happen,
she assures me. On this conviction I allow her to speculate,
she having her bank and her stockbroker; she speculated and
lost. It is true she speculates with her own money, not mine;
nevertheless, you can understand that when 700,000 francs
leave the wife's pocket, the husband always finds it out. But
do you mean to say you have not heard of this? Why, the
thing has made a tremendous noise."
"Yes, I heard it spoken of, but I did not know the details, and
then no one can be more ignorant than I am of the affairs in
the Bourse."
"Then you do not speculate?"
"I? -- How could I speculate when I already have so much
trouble in regulating my income? I should be obliged,
besides my steward, to keep a clerk and a boy. But touching
these Spanish affairs, I think that the baroness did not dream
the whole of the Don Carlos matter. The papers said
something about it, did they not?"
"Then you believe the papers?"
"I? -- not the least in the world; only I fancied that the honest
Messager was an exception to the rule, and that it only
announced telegraphic despatches."

"Nay," said Danglars, "it is my fault; I have chosen my visit "Well, that's what puzzles me," replied Danglars; "the news
at a wrong time, and will retire."
of the return of Don Carlos was brought by telegraph."
"Not at all; on the contrary, be seated; but what is the matter "So that," said Monte Cristo, "you have lost nearly 1,700,000
with you? You look careworn; really, you alarm me. francs this month."
Melancholy in a capitalist, like the appearance of a comet,
"Not nearly, indeed; that is exactly my loss."
presages some misfortune to the world."
"I have been in ill-luck for several days," said Danglars, "and "Diable," said Monte Cristo compassionately, "it is a hard
blow for a third-rate fortune."
I have heard nothing but bad news."
"Ah, indeed?" said Monte Cristo. "Have you had another fall "Third-rate," said Danglars, rather humble, "what do you
mean by that?"
at the Bourse?"
"Certainly," continued Monte Cristo, "I make three
assortments in fortune -- first-rate, second-rate, and
third-rate fortunes. I call those first-rate which are composed
"Really? Does it happen to be Jacopo Manfredi?"
of treasures one possesses under one's hand, such as mines,
"Exactly so. Imagine a man who has transacted business with lands, and funded property, in such states as France, Austria,
me for I don't know how long, to the amount of 800,000 or and England, provided these treasures and property form a
900,000 francs during the year. Never a mistake or delay -- a total of about a hundred millions; I call those second-rate
fellow who paid like a prince. Well, I was a million in fortunes, that are gained by manufacturing enterprises,
advance with him, and now my fine Jacopo Manfredi joint-stock companies, viceroyalties, and principalities, not
drawing more than 1,500,000 francs, the whole forming a
suspends payment!"
capital of about fifty millions; finally, I call those third-rate
"Really?"
fortunes, which are composed of a fluctuating capital,
"It is an unheard-of fatality. I draw upon him for 600,000 dependent upon the will of others, or upon chances which a
francs, my bills are returned unpaid, and, more than that, I bankruptcy involves or a false telegram shakes, such as
hold bills of exchange signed by him to the value of 400,000 banks, speculations of the day -- in fact, all operations under
francs, payable at his correspondent's in Paris at the end of the influence of greater or less mischances, the whole
273
"No; I am safe for a few days at least. I am only annoyed
about a bankrupt of Trieste."


CHAPTER 66


MATRIMONIAL PROJECTS

bringing in a real or fictitious capital of about fifteen millions. my house for his son."
I think this is about your position, is it not?"
"May I ask how much he allows the young man?"
"Confound it, yes!" replied Danglars.
"Five thousand francs per month."
"The result, then, of six more such months as this would be
"Sixty thousand francs per year. I thought I was right in
to reduce the third-rate house to despair."
believing that Cavalcanti to be a stingy fellow. How can a
"Oh," said Danglars, becoming very pale, how you are young man live upon 5,000 francs a month?"
running on!"
"But you understand that if the young man should want a
"Let us imagine seven such months," continued Monte Cristo, few thousands more" -in the same tone. "Tell me, have you ever thought that seven
"Do not advance it; the father will never repay it. You do not
times 1,700,000 francs make nearly twelve millions? No, you
know these ultramontane millionaires; they are regular
have not; -- well, you are right, for if you indulged in such
misers. And by whom were they recommended to you?"
reflections, you would never risk your principal, which is to
the speculator what the skin is to civilized man. We have our "Oh, by the house of Fenzi, one of the best in Florence."
clothes, some more splendid than others, -- this is our credit; "I do not mean to say you will lose, but, nevertheless, mind
but when a man dies he has only his skin; in the same way, you hold to the terms of the agreement."
on retiring from business, you have nothing but your real
principal of about five or six millions, at the most; for "Would you not trust the Cavalcanti?"
third-rate fortunes are never more than a fourth of what they "I? oh, I would advance six millions on his signature. I was
appear to be, like the locomotive on a railway, the size of only speaking in reference to the second-rate fortunes we
which is magnified by the smoke and steam surrounding it. were mentioning just now."
Well, out of the five or six millions which form your real
"And with all this, how unassuming he is! I should never
capital, you have just lost nearly two millions, which must,
have taken him for anything more than a mere major."
of course, in the same degree diminish your credit and
fictitious fortune; to follow out my simile, your skin has been "And you would have flattered him, for certainly, as you say,
opened by bleeding, and this if repeated three or four times he has no manner. The first time I saw him he appeared to
will cause death -- so pay attention to it, my dear Monsieur me like an old lieutenant who had grown mouldy under his
Danglars. Do you want money? Do you wish me to lend you epaulets. But all the Italians are the same; they are like old
Jews when they are not glittering in Oriental splendor."
some?"
"What a bad calculator you are!" exclaimed Danglars, calling
to his assistance all his philosophy and dissimulation. "I have
made money at the same time by speculations which have
succeeded. I have made up the loss of blood by nutrition. I
lost a battle in Spain, I have been defeated in Trieste, but my
naval army in India will have taken some galleons, and my
Mexican pioneers will have discovered some mine."

"The young man is better," said Danglars.

"Well, such things have been."
"That there should be a famine!"

"It is usual, certainly; but Cavalcanti is an original who does
nothing like other people. I cannot help thinking that he has
brought his son to France to choose a wife."

"Recollect the seven fat and the seven lean kine."

"Do you think so?"

"Or, that the sea should become dry, as in the days of
Pharaoh, and even then my vessels would become caravans."

"I am sure of it."

"So much the better. I congratulate you, my dear M.
Danglars," said Monte Cristo; "I see I was deceived, and that
you belong to the class of second-rate fortunes."

"Nothing else was talked of; only some said he was worth
millions, and others that he did not possess a farthing."

"Yes; a little nervous, perhaps, but, upon the whole, he
appeared tolerable. I was uneasy about him."
"Why?"

"Because you met him at my house, just after his
introduction into the world, as they told me. He has been
"Very good, very good! But the wound remains and will travelling with a very severe tutor, and had never been to
Paris before."
reopen at the first loss."
"No, for I am only embarked in certainties," replied Danglars, "Ah, I believe noblemen marry amongst themselves, do they
with the air of a mountebank sounding his own praises; "to not?" asked Danglars carelessly; they like to unite their
fortunes."
involve me, three governments must crumble to dust."

"I think I may aspire to that honor," said Danglars with a
smile, which reminded Monte Cristo of the sickly moons
which bad artists are so fond of daubing into their pictures
of ruins. "But, while we are speaking of business," Danglars
added, pleased to find an opportunity of changing the
subject, "tell me what I am to do for M. Cavalcanti."

"And you have heard his fortune mentioned?"

"And what is your opinion?"
"I ought not to influence you, because it is only my own
personal impression."
"Well, and it is that" --

"My opinion is, that all these old podestas, these ancient
condottieri, -- for the Cavalcanti have commanded armies
"Give him money, if he is recommended to you, and the
and governed provinces, -- my opinion, I say, is, that they
recommendation seems good."
have buried their millions in corners, the secret of which
"Excellent; he presented himself this morning with a bond of they have transmitted only to their eldest sons, who have
40,000 francs, payable at sight, on you, signed by Busoni, and done the same from generation to generation; and the proof
returned by you to me, with your indorsement -- of course, I of this is seen in their yellow and dry appearance, like the
immediately counted him over the forty bank-notes."
florins of the republic, which, from being constantly gazed
Monte Cristo nodded his head in token of assent. "But that is upon, have become reflected in them."
not all," continued Danglars; "he has opened an account with
274

"Certainly," said Danglars, "and this is further supported by
the fact of their not possessing an inch of land."

dinner?"

"Very little, at least; I know of none which Cavalcanti
possesses, excepting his palace in Lucca."

"I did so, but he excused himself on account of Madame de
Morcerf being obliged to go to Dieppe for the benefit of sea
air."

"Ah, he has a palace?" said Danglars, laughing; "come, that is
something."

"Yes, yes," said Danglars, laughing, "it would do her a great
deal of good."

"Yes; and more than that, he lets it to the Minister of Finance
while he lives in a simple house. Oh, as I told you before, I
think the old fellow is very close."

"Why so?"

"Come, you do not flatter him."
"I scarcely know him; I think I have seen him three times in
my life; all I know relating to him is through Busoni and
himself. He was telling me this morning that, tired of letting
his property lie dormant in Italy, which is a dead nation, he
wished to find a method, either in France or England, of
multiplying his millions, but remember, that though I place
great confidence in Busoni, I am not responsible for this."
"Never mind; accept my thanks for the client you have sent
me. It is a fine name to inscribe on my ledgers, and my
cashier was quite proud of it when I explained to him who
the Cavalcanti were. By the way, this is merely a simple
question, when this sort of people marry their sons, do they
give them any fortune?"

"Because it is the air she always breathed in her youth."
Monte Cristo took no notice of this ill-natured remark.
"But still, if Albert be not so rich as Mademoiselle Danglars,"
said the count, "you must allow that he has a fine name?"
"So he has; but I like mine as well."
"Certainly; your name is popular, and does honor to the title
they have adorned it with; but you are too intelligent not to
know that according to a prejudice, too firmly rooted to be
exterminated, a nobility which dates back five centuries is
worth more than one that can only reckon twenty years."
"And for this very reason," said Danglars with a smile, which
he tried to make sardonic, "I prefer M. Andrea Cavalcanti to
M. Albert de Morcerf."
"Still, I should not think the Morcerfs would yield to the
Cavalcanti?"

"Oh, that depends upon circumstances. I know an Italian
prince, rich as a gold mine, one of the noblest families in
Tuscany, who, when his sons married according to his wish,
gave them millions; and when they married against his
consent, merely allowed them thirty crowns a month.
Should Andrea marry according to his father's views, he will,
perhaps, give him one, two, or three millions. For example,
supposing it were the daughter of a banker, he might take an
interest in the house of the father-in-law of his son; then
again, if he disliked his choice, the major takes the key,
double-locks his coffer, and Master Andrea would be
obliged to live like the sons of a Parisian family, by shuffling
cards or rattling the dice."

"The Morcerfs! -- Stay, my dear count," said Danglars; "you
are a man of the world, are you not?"

"Ah, that boy will find out some Bavarian or Peruvian
princess; he will want a crown and an immense fortune."

"Well, what then?"

"I think so."
"And you understand heraldry?"
"A little."
"Well, look at my coat-of-arms, it is worth more than
Morcerf's."
"Why so?"
"Because, though I am not a baron by birth, my real name is,
at least, Danglars."
"While his name is not Morcerf."

"No; these grand lords on the other side of the Alps "How? -- not Morcerf?"
frequently marry into plain families; like Jupiter, they like to
"Not the least in the world."
cross the race. But do you wish to marry Andrea, my dear M.
"Go on."
Danglars, that you are asking so many questions?"
"Ma foi," said Danglars, "it would not be a bad speculation, I
fancy, and you know I am a speculator."

"I have been made a baron, so that I actually am one; he
made himself a count, so that he is not one at all."

"You are not thinking of Mademoiselle Danglars, I hope; you
would not like poor Andrea to have his throat cut by
Albert?"

"Impossible!"

"Albert," repeated Danglars, shrugging his shoulders; "ah,
well; he would care very little about it, I think."

"Listen my dear count; M. de Morcerf has been my friend, or
rather my acquaintance, during the last thirty years. You
know I have made the most of my arms, though I never
forgot my origin."

"But he is betrothed to your daughter, I believe?"

"A proof of great humility or great pride," said Monte Cristo.

"Well, M. de Morcerf and I have talked about this marriage, "Well, when I was a clerk, Morcerf was a mere fisherman."
but Madame de Morcerf and Albert" -"And then he was called" -"You do not mean to say that it would not be a good match?"
"Fernand."
"Indeed, I imagine that Mademoiselle Danglars is as good as "Only Fernand?"
M. de Morcerf."
"Fernand Mondego."
"Mademoiselle Danglars' fortune will be great, no doubt,
especially it the telegraph should not make any more "You are sure?"
mistakes."
"Pardieu, I have bought enough fish of him to know his
"Oh, I do not mean her fortune only; but tell me" --

name."

"What?"

"Then, why did you think of giving your daughter to him?"

"Why did you not invite M. and Madame de Morcerf to your

"Because Fernand and Danglars, being both parvenus, both
275


CHAPTER 66


MATRIMONIAL PROJECTS

having become noble, both rich, are about equal in worth,
excepting that there have been certain things mentioned of
him that were never said of me."
"What?"
"Oh, nothing!"

"I should think so."
"At Yanina?"
"Everywhere."
"Well, write to your correspondent in Yanina, and ask him
what part was played by a Frenchman named Fernand
Mondego in the catastrophe of Ali Tepelini."

"Ah, yes; what you tell me recalls to mind something about
the name of Fernand Mondego. I have heard that name in
"You are right," exclaimed Danglars, rising quickly, "I will
Greece."
write to-day."
"In conjunction with the affairs of Ali Pasha?"
"Do so."
"Exactly so."
"I will."
"This is the mystery," said Danglars. "I acknowledge I would
"And if you should hear of anything very scandalous" -have given anything to find it out."
"I will communicate it to you."
"It would be very easy if you much wished it?"
"You will oblige me." Danglars rushed out of the room, and
"How so?"
made but one leap into his coupe.
"Probably you have some correspondent in Greece?"

276


Chapter 67

At The Office Of The King's Attorney

L

et us leave the banker driving his horses at their fullest
speed, and follow Madame Danglars in her morning
excursion. We have said that at half-past twelve o'clock
Madame Danglars had ordered her horses, and had left
home in the carriage. She directed her course towards the
Faubourg Saint Germain, went down the Rue Mazarine, and
stopped at the Passage du Pont-Neuf. She descended, and
went through the passage. She was very plainly dressed, as
would be the case with a woman of taste walking in the
morning. At the Rue Guenegaud she called a cab, and
directed the driver to go to the Rue de Harlay. As soon as
she was seated in the vehicle, she drew from her pocket a
very thick black veil, which she tied on to her straw bonnet.
She then replaced the bonnet, and saw with pleasure, in a
little pocket-mirror, that her white complexion and brilliant
eyes were alone visible. The cab crossed the Pont-Neuf and
entered the Rue de Harlay by the Place Dauphine; the driver
was paid as the door opened, and stepping lightly up the
stairs Madame Danglars soon reached the Salle des
Pas-Perdus.

which I now sit trembling and ashamed, -- oh, it requires all
my reason to convince me that I am not a very guilty woman
and you a menacing judge." Villefort dropped his head and
sighed. "And I," he said, "I feel that my place is not in the
judge's seat, but on the prisoner's stool."
"You?" said Madame Danglars.
"Yes, I."
"I think, sir, you exaggerate your situation," said Madame
Danglars, whose beautiful eyes sparkled for a moment. "The
paths of which you were just speaking have been traced by
all young men of ardent imaginations. Besides the pleasure,
there is always remorse from the indulgence of our passions,
and, after all, what have you men to fear from all this? the
world excuses, and notoriety ennobles you."
"Madame," replied Villefort, "you know that I am no
hypocrite, or, at least, that I never deceive without a reason.
If my brow be severe, it is because many misfortunes have
clouded it; if my heart be petrified, it is that it might sustain
the blows it has received. I was not so in my youth, I was not
so on the night of the betrothal, when we were all seated
around a table in the Rue du Cours at Marseilles. But since
then everything has changed in and about me; I am
accustomed to brave difficulties, and, in the conflict to crush
those who, by their own free will, or by chance, voluntarily
or involuntarily, interfere with me in my career. It is
generally the case that what we most ardently desire is as
ardently withheld from us by those who wish to obtain it, or
from whom we attempt to snatch it. Thus, the greater
number of a man's errors come before him disguised under
the specious form of necessity; then, after error has been
committed in a moment of excitement, of delirium, or of fear,
we see that we might have avoided and escaped it. The
means we might have used, which we in our blindness could
not see, then seem simple and easy, and we say, `Why did I
not do this, instead of that?' Women, on the contrary, are
rarely tormented with remorse; for the decision does not
come from you, -- your misfortunes are generally imposed
upon you, and your faults the results of others' crimes."

There was a great deal going on that morning, and many
business-like persons at the Palais; business-like persons pay
very little attention to women, and Madame Danglars
crossed the hall without exciting any more attention than
any other woman calling upon her lawyer. There was a great
press of people in M. de Villefort's ante-chamber, but
Madame Danglars had no occasion even to pronounce her
name. The instant she appeared the door-keeper rose, came
to her, and asked her whether she was not the person with
whom the procureur had made an appointment; and on her
affirmative answer being given, he conducted her by a
private passage to M. de Villefort's office. The magistrate
was seated in an arm-chair, writing, with his back towards
the door; he did not move as he heard it open, and the
door-keeper pronounce the words, "Walk in, madame," and
then reclose it; but no sooner had the man's footsteps ceased,
than he started up, drew the bolts, closed the curtains, and
examined every corner of the room. Then, when he had
assured himself that he could neither be seen nor heard, and
was consequently relieved of doubts, he said, -- "Thanks,
madame, -- thanks for your punctuality; "and he offered a "In any case, sir, you will allow," replied Madame Danglars,
chair to Madame Danglars, which she accepted, for her heart "that, even if the fault were alone mine, I last night received a
severe punishment for it."
beat so violently that she felt nearly suffocated.
"It is a long time, madame," said the procureur, describing a "Poor thing," said Villefort, pressing her hand, "it was too
half-circle with his chair, so as to place himself exactly severe for your strength, for you were twice overwhelmed,
opposite to Madame Danglars, -- "it is a long time since I had and yet" -the pleasure of speaking alone with you, and I regret that we
have only now met to enter upon a painful conversation."
"Nevertheless, sir, you see I have answered your first appeal,
although certainly the conversation must be much more
painful for me than for you." Villefort smiled bitterly.
"It is true, then," he said, rather uttering his thoughts aloud
than addressing his companion, -- "it is true, then, that all
our actions leave their traces -- some sad, others bright -- on
our paths; it is true that every step in our lives is like the
course of an insect on the sands; -- it leaves its track! Alas, to
many the path is traced by tears."

"Well?"
"Well, I must tell you. Collect all your courage, for you have
not yet heard all."
"Ah," exclaimed Madame Danglars, alarmed, "what is there
more to hear?"

"You only look back to the past, and it is, indeed, bad
enough. Well, picture to yourself a future more gloomy still
-- certainly frightful, perhaps sanguinary." The baroness
knew how calm Villefort naturally was, and his present
excitement frightened her so much that she opened her
mouth to scream, but the sound died in her throat. "How has
"Sir," said Madame Danglars, "you can feel for my emotion, this terrible past been recalled?" cried Villefort; "how is it
can you not? Spare me, then, I beseech you. When I look at that it has escaped from the depths of the tomb and the
this room, -- whence so many guilty creatures have departed, recesses of our hearts, where it was buried, to visit us now,
trembling and ashamed, when I look at that chair before like a phantom, whitening our cheeks and flushing our
277


CHAPTER 67


AT THE OFFICE OF THE KING'S ATTORNEY

brows with shame?"

current, to Arles; at Arles I was again placed on my litter,
and continued my journey to Marseilles. My recovery lasted
"Alas," said Hermine, "doubtless it is chance."
six months. I never heard you mentioned, and I did not dare
"Chance?" replied Villefort; "No, no, madame, there is no inquire for you. When I returned to Paris, I learned that you,
such thing as chance."
the widow of M. de Nargonne, had married M. Danglars.
"Oh, yes; has not a fatal chance revealed all this? Was it not
by chance the Count of Monte Cristo bought that house?
Was it not by chance he caused the earth to be dug up? Is it
not by chance that the unfortunate child was disinterred
under the trees? -- that poor innocent offspring of mine,
which I never even kissed, but for whom I wept many, many
tears. Ah, my heart clung to the count when he mentioned
the dear spoil found beneath the flowers."

"What was the subject of my thoughts from the time
consciousness returned to me? Always the same -- always
the child's corpse, coming every night in my dreams, rising
from the earth, and hovering over the grave with menacing
look and gesture. I inquired immediately on my return to
Paris; the house had not been inhabited since we left it, but it
had just been let for nine years. I found the tenant. I
pretended that I disliked the idea that a house belonging to
"Well, no, madame, -- this is the terrible news I have to tell my wife's father and mother should pass into the hands of
you," said Villefort in a hollow voice -- "no, nothing was strangers. I offered to pay them for cancelling the lease; they
found beneath the flowers; there was no child disinterred -- demanded 6,000 francs. I would have given 10,000 -- I would
no. You must not weep, no, you must not groan, you must have given 20,000. I had the money with me; I made the
tenant sign the deed of resilition, and when I had obtained
tremble!"
what I so much wanted, I galloped to Auteuil.
"What can you mean?" asked Madame Danglars,
"No one had entered the house since I had left it. It was five
shuddering.
o'clock in the afternoon; I ascended into the red room, and
"I mean that M. de Monte Cristo, digging underneath these waited for night. There all the thoughts which had disturbed
trees, found neither skeleton nor chest, because neither of me during my year of constant agony came back with
them was there!"
double force. The Corsican, who had declared the vendetta
"Neither of them there?" repeated Madame Danglars, her against me, who had followed me from Nimes to Paris, who
had hid himself in the garden, who had struck me, had seen
staring, wide-open eyes expressing her alarm.
me dig the grave, had seen me inter the child, -- he might
"Neither of them there!" she again said, as though striving to
become acquainted with your person, -- nay, he might even
impress herself with the meaning of the words which
then have known it. Would he not one day make you pay for
escaped her.
keeping this terrible secret? Would it not be a sweet revenge
"No," said Villefort, burying his face in his hands, "no, a for him when he found that I had not died from the blow of
hundred times no!"
his dagger? It was therefore necessary, before everything
"Then you did not bury the poor child there, sir? Why did else, and at all risks, that I should cause all traces of the past
to disappear -- that I should destroy every material vestige;
you deceive me? Where did you place it? tell me -- where?"
too much reality would always remain in my recollection. It
"There! But listen to me -- listen -- and you will pity me who was for this I had annulled the lease -- it was for this I had
has for twenty years alone borne the heavy burden of grief I come -- it was for this I was waiting. Night arrived; I allowed
am about to reveal, without casting the least portion upon it to become quite dark. I was without a light in that room;
you."
when the wind shook all the doors, behind which I
continually expected to see some spy concealed, I trembled. I
"Oh, you frighten me! But speak; I will listen."
seemed everywhere to hear your moans behind me in the
"You recollect that sad night, when you were half-expiring
bed, and I dared not turn around. My heart beat so violently
on that bed in the red damask room, while I, scarcely less
that I feared my wound would open. At length, one by one,
agitated than you, awaited your delivery. The child was
all the noises in the neighborhood ceased. I understood that I
born, was given to me -- motionless, breathless, voiceless; we
had nothing to fear, that I should neither be seen nor heard,
thought it dead." Madame Danglars moved rapidly, as
so I decided upon descending to the garden.
though she would spring from her chair, but Villefort
stopped, and clasped his hands as if to implore her attention. "Listen, Hermine; I consider myself as brave as most men,
"We thought it dead," he repeated; "I placed it in the chest, but when I drew from my breast the little key of the staircase,
which was to take the place of a coffin; I descended to the which I had found in my coat -- that little key we both used
garden, I dug a hole, and then flung it down in haste. to cherish so much, which you wished to have fastened to a
Scarcely had I covered it with earth, when the arm of the golden ring -- when I opened the door, and saw the pale
Corsican was stretched towards me; I saw a shadow rise, moon shedding a long stream of white light on the spiral
and, at the same time, a flash of light. I felt pain; I wished to staircase like a spectre, I leaned against the wall, and nearly
cry out, but an icy shiver ran through my veins and stifled shrieked. I seemed to be going mad. At last I mastered my
my voice; I fell lifeless, and fancied myself killed. Never shall agitation. I descended the staircase step by step; the only
I forget your sublime courage, when, having returned to thing I could not conquer was a strange trembling in my
consciousness, I dragged myself to the foot of the stairs, and knees. I grasped the railings; if I had relaxed my hold for a
you, almost dying yourself, came to meet me. We were moment, I should have fallen. I reached the lower door.
obliged to keep silent upon the dreadful catastrophe. You Outside this door a spade was placed against the wall; I took
had the fortitude to regain the house, assisted by your nurse. it, and advanced towards the thicket. I had provided myself
A duel was the pretext for my wound. Though we scarcely with a dark lantern. In the middle of the lawn I stopped to
expected it, our secret remained in our own keeping alone. I light it, then I continued my path.
was taken to Versailles; for three months I struggled with "It was the end of November, all the verdure of the garden
death; at last, as I seemed to cling to life, I was ordered to the had disappeared, the trees were nothing more than skeletons
South. Four men carried me from Paris to Chalons, walking with their long bony arms, and the dead leaves sounded on
six leagues a day; Madame de Villefort followed the litter in the gravel under my feet. My terror overcame me to such a
her carriage. At Chalons I was put upon the Saone, thence I degree as I approached the thicket, that I took a pistol from
passed on to he Rhone, whence I descended, merely with the my pocket and armed myself. I fancied continually that I
278

saw the figure of the Corsican between the branches. I
examined the thicket with my dark lantern; it was empty. I
looked carefully around; I was indeed alone, -- no noise
disturbed the silence but the owl, whose piercing cry seemed
to be calling up the phantoms of the night. I tied my lantern
to a forked branch I had noticed a year before at the precise
spot where I stopped to dig the hole.
"The grass had grown very thickly there during the summer,
and when autumn arrived no one had been there to mow it.
Still one place where the grass was thin attracted my
attention; it evidently was there I had turned up the ground.
I went to work. The hour, then, for which I had been waiting
during the last year had at length arrived. How I worked,
how I hoped, how I struck every piece of turf, thinking to
find some resistance to my spade! But no, I found nothing,
though I had made a hole twice as large as the first. I thought
I had been deceived -- had mistaken the spot. I turned
around, I looked at the trees, I tried to recall the details
which had struck me at the time. A cold, sharp wind
whistled through the leafless branches, and yet the drops fell
from my forehead. I recollected that I was stabbed just as I
was trampling the ground to fill up the hole; while doing so I
had leaned against a laburnum; behind me was an artificial
rockery, intended to serve as a resting-place for persons
walking in the garden; in falling, my hand, relaxing its hold
of the laburnum, felt the coldness of the stone. On my right I
saw the tree, behind me the rock. I stood in the same attitude,
and threw myself down. I rose, and again began digging and
enlarging the hole; still I found nothing, nothing -- the chest
was no longer there!"

"Something more terrible, more fatal, more alarming for us -the child was, perhaps, alive, and the assassin may have
saved it!"
Madame Danglars uttered a piercing cry, and, seizing
Villefort's hands, exclaimed, "My child was alive?" said she;
"you buried my child alive? You were not certain my child
was dead, and you buried it? Ah" -Madame Danglars had risen, and stood before the procureur,
whose hands she wrung in her feeble grasp. "I know not; I
merely suppose so, as I might suppose anything else,"
replied Villefort with a look so fixed, it indicated that his
powerful mind was on the verge of despair and madness.
"Ah, my child, my poor child!" cried the baroness, falling on
her chair, and stifling her sobs in her handkerchief. Villefort,
becoming somewhat reassured, perceived that to avert the
maternal storm gathering over his head, he must inspire
Madame Danglars with the terror he felt. "You understand,
then, that if it were so," said he, rising in his turn, and
approaching the baroness, to speak to her in a lower tone,
"we are lost. This child lives, and some one knows it lives -some one is in possession of our secret; and since Monte
Cristo speaks before us of a child disinterred, when that
child could not be found, it is he who is in possession of our
secret."
"Just God, avenging God!" murmured Madame Danglars.
Villefort's only answer was a stifled groan.
"But the child -- the child, sir?" repeated the agitated mother.

"How I have searched for him," replied Villefort, wringing
"The chest no longer there?" murmured Madame Danglars, his hands; "how I have called him in my long sleepless
nights; how I have longed for royal wealth to purchase a
choking with fear.
million of secrets from a million of men, and to find mine
Think not I contented myself with this one effort," continued among them! At last, one day, when for the hundredth time I
Villefort. "No; I searched the whole thicket. I thought the took up my spade, I asked myself again and again what the
assassin, having discovered the chest, and supposing it to be Corsican could have done with the child. A child encumbers
a treasure, had intended carrying it off, but, perceiving his a fugitive; perhaps, on perceiving it was still alive, he had
error, had dug another hole, and deposited it there; but I thrown it into the river."
could find nothing. Then the idea struck me that he had not
taken these precautions, and had simply thrown it in a "Impossible!" cried Madame Danglars: "a man may murder
corner. In the last case I must wait for daylight to renew my another out of revenge, but he would not deliberately drown
a child."
search. I remained the room and waited."
"Perhaps," continued Villefort, "he had put it in the
"Oh, heavens!"
foundling hospital."
When daylight dawned I went down again. My first visit
was to the thicket. I hoped to find some traces which had "Oh, yes, yes," cried the baroness; "my child is there!"
escaped me in the darkness. I had turned up the earth over a "I ran to the hospital, and learned that the same night -- the
surface of more than twenty feet square, and a depth of two night of the 20th of September -- a child had been brought
feet. A laborer would not have done in a day what occupied there, wrapped in part of a fine linen napkin, purposely torn
me an hour. But I could find nothing -- absolutely nothing. in half. This portion of the napkin was marked with half a
Then I renewed the search. Supposing it had been thrown baron's crown, and the letter H."
aside, it would probably be on the path which led to the little
"Truly, truly," said Madame Danglars, "all my linen is
gate; but this examination was as useless as the first, and
marked thus; Monsieur de Nargonne was a baronet, and my
with a bursting heart I returned to the thicket, which now
name is Hermine. Thank God, my child was not then dead!"
contained no hope for me."
"No, it was not dead."
"Oh," cried Madame Danglars, "it was enough to drive you
"And you can tell me so without fearing to make me die of
mad!"
joy? Where is the child?" Villefort shrugged his shoulders.
"I hoped for a moment that it might," said Villefort; "but that
"Do I know?" said he; "and do you believe that if I knew I
happiness was denied me. However, recovering my strength
would relate to you all its trials and all its adventures as
and my ideas, `Why,' said I, `should that man have carried
would a dramatist or a novel writer? Alas, no, I know not. A
away the corpse?'"
woman, about six months after, came to claim it with the
"But you said," replied Madame Danglars, "he would require other half of the napkin. This woman gave all the requisite
it as a proof."
particulars, and it was intrusted to her."
"Ah, no, madame, that could not be. Dead bodies are not "But you should have inquired for the woman; you should
kept a year; they are shown to a magistrate, and the evidence have traced her."
is taken. Now, nothing of the kind has happened."
"And what do you think I did? I feigned a criminal process,
"What then?" asked Hermine, trembling violently.
and employed all the most acute bloodhounds and skilful
279


CHAPTER 67


AT THE OFFICE OF THE KING'S ATTORNEY

agents in search of her. They traced her to Chalons, and there connection?"
they lost her."
"Never, to any one."
"They lost her?"
"You understand me," replied Villefort, affectionately; "when
"Yes, forever." Madame Danglars had listened to this recital I say any one, -- pardon my urgency, -- to any one living I
with a sigh, a tear, or a shriek for every detail. "And this is mean?"
all?" said she; "and you stopped there?"
"Yes, yes, I understand very well," ejaculated the baroness;
"Oh, no," said Villefort; "I never ceased to search and to "never, I swear to you."
inquire. However, the last two or three years I had allowed
"Were you ever in the habit of writing in the evening what
myself some respite. But now I will begin with more
had transpired in the morning? Do you keep a journal?"
perseverance and fury than ever, since fear urges me, not my
"No, my life has been passed in frivolity; I wish to forget it
conscience."
myself."
"But," replied Madame Danglars, "the Count of Monte Cristo
can know nothing, or he would not seek our society as he "Do you talk in your sleep?"
does."
"I sleep soundly, like a child; do you not remember?" The
"Oh, the wickedness of man is very great," said Villefort, color mounted to the baroness's face, and Villefort turned
"since it surpasses the goodness of God. Did you observe awfully pale.
that man's eyes while he was speaking to us?"
"It is true," said he, in so low a tone that he could hardly be
heard.
"No."
"But have you ever watched him carefully?"

"Well?" said the baroness.

"Well, I understand what I now have to do," replied Villefort.
"In less than one week from this time I will ascertain who
this M. de Monte Cristo is, whence he comes, where he goes,
and why he speaks in our presence of children that have
been disinterred in a garden." Villefort pronounced these
"And you see you would have been deceived."
words with an accent which would have made the count
"Yes, doubtless."
shudder had he heard him. Then he pressed the hand the
baroness reluctantly gave him, and led her respectfully back
"But believe me, that man has other projects. For that reason
to the door. Madame Danglars returned in another cab to the
I wished to see you, to speak to you, to warn you against
passage, on the other side of which she found her carriage,
every one, but especially against him. Tell me," cried
and her coachman sleeping peacefully on his box while
Villefort, fixing his eyes more steadfastly on her than he had
waiting for her.
ever done before, "did you ever reveal to any one our
"Doubtless he is capricious, but that is all; one thing alone
struck me, -- of all the exquisite things he placed before us,
he touched nothing. I might have suspected he was
poisoning us."

280


Chapter 68

A Summer Ball

T

he same day during the interview between Madame
Danglars and the procureur, a travelling-carriage
entered the Rue du Helder, passed through the gateway of
No. 27, and stopped in the yard. In a moment the door was
opened, and Madame de Morcerf alighted, leaning on her
son's arm. Albert soon left her, ordered his horses, and
having arranged his toilet, drove to the Champs Elysees, to
the house of Monte Cristo. The count received him with his
habitual smile. It was a strange thing that no one ever
appeared to advance a step in that man's favor. Those who
would, as it were, force a passage to his heart, found an
impassable barrier. Morcerf, who ran towards him with
open arms, was chilled as he drew near, in spite of the
friendly smile, and simply held out his hand. Monte Cristo
shook it coldly, according to his invariable practice. "Here I
am, dear count."
"Welcome home again."
"I arrived an hour since."
"From Dieppe?"
"No, from Treport."
"Indeed?"
"And I have come at once to see you."
"That is extremely kind of you," said Monte Cristo with a
tone of perfect indifference.
"And what is the news?"

Madame Danglars, M. and Madame de Villefort, -- charming
people, -- M. Debray, Maximilian Morrel, and M. de
Chateau-Renaud."
"Did they speak of me?"
"Not a word."
"So much the worse."
"Why so? I thought you wished them to forget you?"
"If they did not speak of me, I am sure they thought about
me, and I am in despair."
"How will that affect you, since Mademoiselle Danglars was
not among the number here who thought of you? Truly, she
might have thought of you at home."
"I have no fear of that; or, if she did, it was only in the same
way in which I think of her."
"Touching sympathy! So you hate each other?" said the
count.
"Listen," said Morcerf -- "if Mademoiselle Danglars were
disposed to take pity on my supposed martyrdom on her
account, and would dispense with all matrimonial
formalities between our two families, I am ready to agree to
the arrangement. In a word, Mademoiselle Danglars would
make a charming mistress -- but a wife -- diable!"
"And this," said Monte Cristo, "is your opinion of your
intended spouse?"

"Yes; it is rather unkind, I acknowledge, but it is true. But as
this dream cannot be realized, since Mademoiselle Danglars
"I know it, but in asking for news, I mean, have you done
must become my lawful wife, live perpetually with me, sing
anything for me?"
to me, compose verses and music within ten paces of me,
"Had you commissioned me?" said Monte Cristo, feigning and that for my whole life, it frightens me. One may forsake
uneasiness.
a mistress, but a wife, -- good heavens! There she must
always be; and to marry Mademoiselle Danglars would be
"Come, come," said Albert, "do not assume so much
awful."
indifference. It is said, sympathy travels rapidly, and when
at Treport, I felt the electric shock; you have either been "You are difficult to please, viscount."
working for me or thinking of me."
"Yes, for I often wish for what is impossible."
"Possibly," said Monte Cristo, "I have indeed thought of you,
"What is that?"
but the magnetic wire I was guiding acted, indeed, without
"To find such a wife as my father found." Monte Cristo
my knowledge."
turned pale, and looked at Albert, while playing with some
"Indeed? Pray tell me how it happened?"
magnificent pistols.
"Willingly. M. Danglars dined with me."
"Your father was fortunate, then?" said he.
"I know it; to avoid meeting him, my mother and I left
"You know my opinion of my mother, count; look at her, -town."
still beautiful, witty, more charming than ever. For any other
"But he met here M. Andrea Cavalcanti."
son to have stayed with his mother for four days at Treport,
it would have been a condescension or a martyrdom, while I
"Your Italian prince?"
return, more contented, more peaceful -- shall I say more
"Not so fast; M. Andrea only calls himself count."
poetic! -- than if I had taken Queen Mab or Titania as my
companion."
"Calls himself, do you say?"
"You should not ask a stranger, a foreigner, for news."

"Yes, calls himself."
"Is he not a count?"

"That is an overwhelming demonstration, and you would
make every one vow to live a single life."

"Such are my reasons for not liking to marry Mademoiselle
"What can I know of him? He calls himself so. I, of course, Danglars. Have you ever noticed how much a thing is
give him the same title, and every one else does likewise."
heightened in value when we obtain possession of it? The
"What a strange man you are! What next? You say M. diamond which glittered in the window at Marle's or
Fossin's shines with more splendor when it is our own; but if
Danglars dined here?"
we are compelled to acknowledge the superiority of another,
"Yes, with Count Cavalcanti, the marquis his father,
and still must retain the one that is inferior, do you not know
281


CHAPTER 68


A SUMMER BALL

what we have to endure?"

"But yet M. Danglars appeared" --

"Worldling," murmured the count.

"Delighted with you, was he not? Well, he is a man of bad
taste, and is still more enchanted with another. I know not
"Thus I shall rejoice when Mademoiselle Eugenie perceives I
whom; look and judge for yourself."
am but a pitiful atom, with scarcely as many hundred
thousand francs as she has millions." Monte Cristo smiled. "Thank you, I understand. But my mother -- no, not my
"One plan occurred to me," continued Albert; "Franz likes all mother; I mistake -- my father intends giving a ball."
that is eccentric; I tried to make him fall in love with
"A ball at this season?"
Mademoiselle Danglars; but in spite of four letters, written in
the most alluring style, he invariably answered: `My "Summer balls are fashionable."
eccentricity may be great, but it will not make me break my "If they were not, the countess has only to wish it, and they
promise.'"
would become so."
"That is what I call devoted friendship, to recommend to "You are right; You know they are select affairs; those who
another one whom you would not marry yourself." Albert remain in Paris in July must be true Parisians. Will you take
smiled. -- "Apropos," continued he, "Franz is coming soon, charge of our invitation to Messieurs Cavalcanti?"
but it will not interest you; you dislike him, I think?"
"When will it take place?"
"I?" said Monte Cristo; "my dear Viscount, how have you
"On Saturday."
discovered that I did not like M. Franz! I like every one."
"And you include me in the expression every one -- many "M. Cavalcanti's father will be gone."
thanks!"

"But the son will be here; will you invite young M.
"Let us not mistake," said Monte Cristo; "I love every one as Cavalcanti?"
God commands us to love our neighbor, as Christians; but I "I do not know him, viscount."
thoroughly hate but a few. Let us return to M. Franz
"You do not know him?"
d'Epinay. Did you say he was coming?"
"No, I never saw him until a few days since, and am not
"Yes; summoned by M. de Villefort, who is apparently as
responsible for him."
anxious to get Mademoiselle Valentine married as M.
Danglars is to see Mademoiselle Eugenie settled. It must be a "But you receive him at your house?"
very irksome office to be the father of a grown-up daughter; "That is another thing: he was recommended to me by a
it seems to make one feverish, and to raise one's pulse to good abbe, who may be deceived. Give him a direct
ninety beats a minute until the deed is done."
invitation, but do not ask me to present him. If he were
"But M. d'Epinay, unlike you, bears his misfortune
patiently."
"Still more, he talks seriously about the matter, puts on a
white tie, and speaks of his family. He entertains a very high
opinion of M. and Madame de Villefort."

afterwards to marry Mademoiselle Danglars, you would
accuse me of intrigue, and would be challenging me, -besides, I may not be there myself."
"Where?"
"At your ball."

"Which they deserve, do they not?"

"Why should you not be there?"

"I believe they do. M. de Villefort has always passed for a
severe but a just man."

"Because you have not yet invited me."

"There is, then, one," said Monte Cristo, "whom you do not
condemn like poor Danglars?"

"You are very kind, but I may be prevented."

"But I come expressly for that purpose."

"Because I am not compelled to marry his daughter "If I tell you one thing, you will be so amiable as to set aside
all impediments."
perhaps," replied Albert, laughing.
"Indeed, my dear sir," said Monte Cristo, "you are "Tell me what it is."
revoltingly foppish."

"My mother begs you to come."

"I foppish? how do you mean?"

"The Comtesse de Morcerf?" said Monte Cristo, starting.

"Yes; pray take a cigar, and cease to defend yourself, and to
struggle to escape marrying Mademoiselle Danglars. Let
things take their course; perhaps you may not have to
retract."

"Ah, count," said Albert, "I assure you Madame de Morcerf
speaks freely to me, and if you have not felt those
sympathetic fibres of which I spoke just now thrill within
you, you must be entirely devoid of them, for during the last
four days we have spoken of no one else."

"Bah," said Albert, staring.
"Doubtless, my dear viscount, you will not be taken by force;
and seriously, do you wish to break off your engagement?"

"You have talked of me?"

"I would give a hundred thousand francs to be able to do so."

"Then I am also a puzzle to your mother? I should have
thought her too reasonable to be led by imagination."

"Then make yourself quite easy. M. Danglars would give
double that sum to attain the same end."

"Yes, that is the penalty of being a living puzzle!"

"A problem, my dear count, for every one -- for my mother
"Am I, indeed, so happy?" said Albert, who still could not as well as others; much studied, but not solved, you still
prevent an almost imperceptible cloud passing across his remain an enigma, do not fear. My mother is only astonished
that you remain so long unsolved. I believe, while the
brow. "But, my dear count, has M. Danglars any reason?"
Countess G---- takes you for Lord Ruthven, my mother
"Ah, there is your proud and selfish nature. You would imagines you to be Cagliostro or the Count Saint-Germain.
expose the self-love of another with a hatchet, but you shrink The first opportunity you have, confirm her in her opinion; it
if your own is attacked with a needle."
will be easy for you, as you have the philosophy of the one
282

and the wit of the other."

"I have spoken to you indiscreetly about Danglars."

"I thank you for the warning," said the count; "I shall
endeavor to be prepared for all suppositions."

"On the contrary, speak to me always in the same strain
about him."

"You will, then, come on Saturday?"

"I am glad to be reassured on that point. Apropos, when do
you aspect M. d'Epinay?"

"Yes, since Madame de Morcerf invites me."
"You are very kind."
"Will M. Danglars be there?"
"He has already been invited by my father. We shall try to
persuade the great d'Aguesseau,* M. de Villefort, to come,
but have not much hope of seeing him."
"`Never despair of anything,' says the proverb."
* Magistrate and orator of great eloquence -- chancellor of
France under Louis XV.
"Do you dance, count?"

"Five or six days hence at the latest."
"And when is he to be married?"
"Immediately on the arrival of M. and Madame de
Saint-Meran."
"Bring him to see me. Although you say I do not like him, I
assure you I shall be happy to see him."
"I will obey your orders, my lord."
"Good-by."
"Until Saturday, when I may expect you, may I not?"

"I dance?"

"Yes, I promised you." The Count watched Albert, waving
his hand to him. When he had mounted his phaeton, Monte
"Yes, you; it would not be astonishing."
Cristo turned, and seeing Bertuccio, "What news?" said he.
"That is very well before one is over forty. No, I do not dance, "She went to the Palais," replied the steward.
but I like to see others do so. Does Madame de Morcerf
"Did she stay long there?"
dance?"
"An hour and a half."
"Never; you can talk to her, she so delights in your
"Did she return home?"
conversation."
"Indeed?"

"Directly."

"Yes, truly; and I assure you. You are the only man of whom
I have heard her speak with interest." Albert rose and took
his hat; the count conducted him to the door. "I have one
thing to reproach myself with," said he, stopping Albert on
the steps. "What is it?"

"Well, my dear Bertuccio," said the count, "I now advise you
to go in quest of the little estate I spoke to you of in
Normandy." Bertuccio bowed, and as his wishes were in
perfect harmony with the order he had received, he started
the same evening.

283


CHAPTER 69


Chapter 69

M

THE INQUIRY

The Inquiry

. de Villefort kept the promise he had made to
Madame Danglars, to endeavor to find out how the
Count of Monte Cristo had discovered the history of the
house at Auteuil. He wrote the same day for the required
information to M. de Boville, who, from having been an
inspector of prisons, was promoted to a high office in the
police; and the latter begged for two days time to ascertain
exactly who would be most likely to give him full particulars.
At the end of the second day M. de Villefort received the
following note: --

"I will come again at that time," replied the visitor, who then
retired.

himself for months at a time, according to his valet de
chambre. His valet looked at the visitors through a sort of
wicket; and if their faces were unknown to him or displeased
him, he replied that the abbe was not in Paris, an answer
which satisfied most persons, because the abbe was known
to be a great traveller. Besides, whether at home or not,
whether in Paris or Cairo, the abbe always left something to
give away, which the valet distributed through this wicket in
his master's name. The other room near the library was a
bedroom. A bed without curtains, four arm-chairs, and a
couch, covered with yellow Utrecht velvet, composed, with a
prie-Dieu, all its furniture. Lord Wilmore resided in Rue
Fontaine-Saint-George. He was one of those English tourists
who consume a large fortune in travelling. He hired the
apartment in which he lived furnished, passed only a few
hours in the day there, and rarely slept there. One of his
peculiarities was never to speak a word of French, which he
however wrote with great facility."

"The mission with which I am charged, sir," replied the
visitor, speaking with hesitation, "is a confidential one on the
part of him who fulfils it, and him by whom he is
employed." The abbe bowed. "Your probity," replied the
stranger, "is so well known to the prefect that he wishes as a
magistrate to ascertain from you some particulars connected
with the public safety, to ascertain which I am deputed to see
you. It is hoped that no ties of friendship or humane
consideration will induce you to conceal the truth."

At the appointed hour the same man returned in the same
carriage, which, instead of stopping this time at the end of
the Rue Ferou, drove up to the green door. He knocked, and
it opened immediately to admit him. From the signs of
respect the valet paid him, he saw that his note had
produced a good effect. "Is the abbe at home?" asked he.

"Yes; he is at work in his library, but he expects you, sir,"
replied the valet. The stranger ascended a rough staircase,
"The person called the Count of Monte Cristo is an intimate
and before a table, illumined by a lamp whose light was
acquaintance of Lord Wilmore, a rich foreigner, who is
concentrated by a large shade while the rest of the apartment
sometimes seen in Paris and who is there at this moment; he
was in partial darkness, he perceived the abbe in a monk's
is also known to the Abbe Busoni, a Sicilian priest, of high
dress, with a cowl on his head such as was used by learned
repute in the East, where he has done much good."
men of the Middle Ages. "Have I the honor of addressing the
M. de Villefort replied by ordering the strictest inquiries to Abbe Busoni?" asked the visitor.
be made respecting these two persons; his orders were
"Yes, sir," replied the abbe; "and you are the person whom M.
executed, and the following evening he received these
de Boville, formerly an inspector of prisons, sends to me
details: -from the prefect of police?"
"The abbe, who was in Paris only for a month, inhabited a
"Exactly, sir."
small two-storied house behind Saint-Sulpice; there were
two rooms on each floor and he was the only tenant. The two "One of the agents appointed to secure the safety of Paris?"
lower rooms consisted of a dining-room, with a table, chairs, "Yes, sir"" replied the stranger with a slight hesitation, and
and side-board of walnut, -- and a wainscoted parlor, blushing.
without ornaments, carpet, or timepiece. It was evident that
the abbe limited himself to objects of strict necessity. He The abbe replaced the large spectacles, which covered not
preferred to use the sitting-room upstairs, which was more only his eyes but his temples, and sitting down motioned to
library than parlor, and was furnished with theological his visitor to do the same. "I am at your service, sir," said the
books and parchments, in which he delighted to bury abbe, with a marked Italian accent.

The day after this important information had been given to
the king's attorney, a man alighted from a carriage at the
corner of the Rue Ferou, and rapping at an olive-green door,
asked if the Abbe Busoni were within. "No, he went out
early this morning," replied the valet.
"I might not always be content with that answer," replied the
visitor, "for I come from one to whom everyone must be at
home. But have the kindness to give the Abbe Busoni" --

"Provided, sir, the particulars you wish for do not interfere
with my scruples or my conscience. I am a priest, sir, and the
secrets of confession, for instance, must remain between me
and God, and not between me and human justice."
"Do not alarm yourself, monsieur, we will duly respect your
conscience."
At this moment the abbe pressed down his side of the shade
and so raised it on the other, throwing a bright light on the
stranger's face, while his own remained obscured. "Excuse
me, abbe," said the envoy of the prefect of the police, "but the
light tries my eyes very much." The abbe lowered the shade.
"Now, sir, I am listening -- go on."
"I will come at once to the point. Do you know the Count of
Monte Cristo?"
"You mean Monsieur Zaccone, I presume?"

"Zaccone? -- is not his name Monte Cristo?"
"I told you he was not at home," repeated the valet. "Then on
his return give him that card and this sealed paper. Will he "Monte Cristo is the name of an estate, or, rather, of a rock,
and not a family name."
be at home at eight o'clock this evening?"
"Doubtless, unless he is at work, which is the same as if he "Well, be it so -- let us not dispute about words; and since M.
de Monte Cristo and M. Zaccone are the same" -were out."
284

"Absolutely the same."

"In the navy."

"Let us speak of M. Zaccone."

"Are you not his confessor?"

"Agreed."

"No, sir; I believe he is a Lutheran."

"I asked you if you knew him?"

"A Lutheran?"

"Extremely well."

"I say, I believe such is the case, I do not affirm it; besides,
liberty of conscience is established in France."

"Who is he?"
"The son of a rich shipbuilder in Malta."
"I know that is the report; but, as you are aware, the police
does not content itself with vague reports."

"Doubtless, and we are not now inquiring into his creed, but
his actions; in the name of the prefect of police, I ask you
what you know of him.

"However," replied the abbe, with an affable smile, "when
that report is in accordance with the truth, everybody must
believe it, the police as well as all the rest."

"He passes for a very charitable man. Our holy father, the
pope, has made him a knight of Jesus Christ for the services
he rendered to the Christians in the East; he has five or six
rings as testimonials from Eastern monarchs of his services."

"Are you sure of what you assert?"

"Does he wear them?"

"What do you mean by that question?"
"Understand, sir, I do not in the least suspect your veracity; I
ask if you are certain of it?"

"No, but he is proud of them; he is better pleased with
rewards given to the benefactors of man than to his
destroyers."

"I knew his father, M. Zaccone."

"He is a Quaker then?"

"Ah, indeed?"

"Exactly, he is a Quaker, with the exception of the peculiar
dress."

"And when a child I often played with the son in the
timber-yards."

"Has he any friends?"

"But whence does he derive the title of count?"

"Yes, every one who knows him is his friend."

"You are aware that may be bought."

"But has he any enemies?"

"In Italy?"

"One only."

"Everywhere."

"What is his name?"

"And his immense riches, whence does he procure them?"

"Lord Wilmore."

"They may not be so very great."

"Where is he?"

"How much do you suppose he possesses?"

"He is in Paris just now."

"From one hundred and fifty to two hundred thousand
livres per annum."

"Can he give me any particulars?"

"That is reasonable," said the visitor; "I have heard he had
three or four millions."

"Do you know his abode?"

"Two hundred thousand per annum would make four
millions of capital."
"But I was told he had four millions per annum?"
"That is not probable."
"Do you know this Island of Monte Cristo?"
"Certainly, every one who has come from Palermo, Naples,
or Rome to France by sea must know it, since he has passed
close to it and must have seen it."
"I am told it is a delightful place?"
"It is a rock."
"And why has the count bought a rock?"
"For the sake of being a count. In Italy one must have
territorial possessions to be a count."
"You have, doubtless, heard the adventures of M. Zaccone's
youth?"
"The father's?"

"Important ones; he was in India with Zaccone."
"It's somewhere in the Chaussee d'Antin; but I know neither
the street nor the number."
"Are you at variance with the Englishman?"
"I love Zaccone, and he hates him; we are consequently not
friends."
"Do you think the Count of Monte Cristo had ever been in
France before he made this visit to Paris?"
"To that question I can answer positively; no, sir, he had not,
because he applied to me six months ago for the particulars
he required, and as I did not know when I might again come
to Paris, I recommended M. Cavalcanti to him."
"Andrea?"
"No, Bartolomeo, his father."
"Now, sir, I have but one question more to ask, and I charge
you, in the name of honor, of humanity, and of religion, to
answer me candidly."
"What is it, sir?"

"No, the son's."

"Do you know with what design M. de Monte Cristo
purchased a house at Auteuil?"

"I know nothing certain; at that period of his life, I lost sight
of my young comrade."

"Certainly, for he told me."

"Was he in the wars?"
"I think he entered the service."
"In what branch?"

"What is it, sir?"
"To make a lunatic asylum of it, similar to that founded by
the Count of Pisani at Palermo. Do you know about that
institution?"
285


CHAPTER 69


THE INQUIRY

"I have heard of it."

there Wilmore had first met him and fought against him;
and in that war Zaccone had been taken prisoner, sent to
"It is a magnificent charity." Having said this, the abbe
England, and consigned to the hulks, whence he had
bowed to imply he wished to pursue his studies. The visitor
escaped by swimming. Then began his travels, his duels, his
either understood the abbe's meaning, or had no more
caprices; then the insurrection in Greece broke out, and he
questions to ask; he arose, and the abbe accompanied him to
had served in the Grecian ranks. While in that service he had
the door. "You are a great almsgiver," said the visitor, "and
discovered a silver mine in the mountains of Thessaly, but
although you are said to be rich, I will venture to offer you
he had been careful to conceal it from every one. After the
something for your poor people; will you accept my
battle of Navarino, when the Greek government was
offering?"
consolidated, he asked of King Otho a mining grant for that
"I thank you, sir; I am only jealous in one thing, and that is district, which was given him. Hence that immense fortune,
that the relief I give should be entirely from my own which, in Lord Wilmore's opinion, possibly amounted to one
resources."
or two millions per annum, -- a precarious fortune, which
might be momentarily lost by the failure of the mine.
"However" -"My resolution, sir, is unchangeable, but you have only to
search for yourself and you will find, alas, but too many
objects upon whom to exercise your benevolence." The abbe
once more bowed as he opened the door, the stranger bowed
and took his leave, and the carriage conveyed him straight to
the house of M. de Villefort. An hour afterwards the carriage
was again ordered, and this time it went to the Rue
Fontaine-Saint-George, and stopped at No. 5, where Lord
Wilmore lived. The stranger had written to Lord Wilmore,
requesting an interview, which the latter had fixed for ten
o'clock. As the envoy of the prefect of police arrived ten
minutes before ten, he was told that Lord Wilmore, who was
precision and punctuality personified, was not yet come in,
but that he would be sure to return as the clock struck.
The visitor was introduced into the drawing-room, which
was like all other furnished drawing-rooms. A mantle-piece,
with two modern Sevres vases, a timepiece representing
Cupid with his bent bow, a mirror with an engraving on
each side -- one representing Homer carrying his guide, the
other, Belisarius begging -- a grayish paper; red and black
tapestry -- such was the appearance of Lord Wilmore's
drawing-room. It was illuminated by lamps with
ground-glass shades which gave only a feeble light, as if out
of consideration for the envoy's weak sight. After ten
minutes' expectation the clock struck ten; at the fifth stroke
the door opened and Lord Wilmore appeared. He was rather
above the middle height, with thin reddish whiskers, light
complexion and light hair, turning rather gray. He was
dressed with all the English peculiarity, namely, in a blue
coat, with gilt buttons and high collar, in the fashion of 1811,
a white kerseymere waistcoat, and nankeen pantaloons,
three inches too short, but which were prevented by straps
from slipping up to the knee. His first remark on entering
was, -- "You know, sir, I do not speak French?"
"I know you do not like to converse in our language," replied
the envoy. "But you may use it," replied Lord Wilmore; "I
understand it."

"But," asked the visitor, "do you know why he came to
France?"
"He is speculating in railways," said Lord Wilmore, "and as
he is an expert chemist and physicist, he has invented a new
system of telegraphy, which he is seeking to bring to
perfection."
"How much does he spend yearly?" asked the prefect.
"Not more than five or six hundred thousand francs," said
Lord Wilmore; "he is a miser." Hatred evidently inspired the
Englishman, who, knowing no other reproach to bring on
the count, accused him of avarice. "Do you know his house
at Auteuil?"
"Certainly."
"What do you know respecting it?"
"Do you wish to know why he bought it?"
"Yes."
"The count is a speculator, who will certainly ruin himself in
experiments. He supposes there is in the neighborhood of
the house he has bought a mineral spring equal to those at
Bagneres, Luchon, and Cauterets. He is going to turn his
house into a Badhaus, as the Germans term it. He has
already dug up all the garden two or three times to find the
famous spring, and, being unsuccessful, he will soon
purchase all the contiguous houses. Now, as I dislike him,
and hope his railway, his electric telegraph, or his search for
baths, will ruin him, I am watching for his discomfiture,
which must soon take place."
"What was the cause of your quarrel?"
"When he was in England he seduced the wife of one of my
friends."
"Why do you not seek revenge?"
"I have already fought three duels with him," said the
Englishman, "the first with the pistol, the second with the
sword, and the third with the sabre."

"And I," replied the visitor, changing his idiom, "know
enough of English to keep up the conversation. Do not put "And what was the result of those duels?"
yourself to the slightest inconvenience."
"The first time, he broke my arm; the second, he wounded
"Aw?" said Lord Wilmore, with that tone which is only me in the breast; and the third time, made this large wound."
The Englishman turned down his shirt-collar, and showed a
known to natives of Great Britain.
scar, whose redness proved it to be a recent one. "So that,
The envoy presented his letter of introduction, which the
you see, there is a deadly feud between us."
latter read with English coolness, and having finished, -- "I
"But," said the envoy, "you do not go about it in the right
understand," said he, "perfectly."
way to kill him, if I understand you correctly."
Then began the questions, which were similar to those which
had been addressed to the Abbe Busoni. But as Lord "Aw?" said the Englishman, "I practice shooting every day,
Wilmore, in the character of the count's enemy, was less and every other day Grisier comes to my house."
restrained in his answers, they were more numerous; he This was all the visitor wished to ascertain, or, rather, all the
described the youth of Monte Cristo, who he said, at ten Englishman appeared to know. The agent arose, and having
years of age, entered the service of one of the petty bowed to Lord Wilmore, who returned his salutation with
sovereigns of India who make war on the English. It was the stiff politeness of the English, he retired. Lord Wilmore,
286

having heard the door close after him, returned to his
bedroom, where with one hand he pulled off his light hair,
his red whiskers, his false jaw, and his wound, to resume the
black hair, dark complexion, and pearly teeth of the Count of
Monte Cristo. It was M. de Villefort, and not the prefect, who

returned to the house of M. de Villefort. The procureur felt
more at ease, although he had learned nothing really
satisfactory, and, for the first time since the dinner-party at
Auteuil, he slept soundly.

287


CHAPTER 70


Chapter 70

I

t was in the warmest days of July, when in due course of
time the Saturday arrived upon which the ball was to take
place at M. de Morcerf's. It was ten o'clock at night; the
branches of the great trees in the garden of the count's house
stood out boldly against the azure canopy of heaven, which
was studded with golden stars, but where the last fleeting
clouds of a vanishing storm yet lingered. From the
apartments on the ground-floor might be heard the sound of
music, with the whirl of the waltz and galop, while brilliant
streams of light shone through the openings of the Venetian
blinds. At this moment the garden was only occupied by
about ten servants, who had just received orders from their
mistress to prepare the supper, the serenity of the weather
continuing to increase. Until now, it had been undecided
whether the supper should take place in the dining-room, or
under a long tent erected on the lawn, but the beautiful blue
sky, studded with stars, had settled the question in favor of
the lawn. The gardens were illuminated with colored
lanterns, according to the Italian custom, and, as is usual in
countries where the luxuries of the table -- the rarest of all
luxuries in their complete form -- are well understood, the
supper-table was loaded with wax-lights and flowers.
At the time the Countess of Morcerf returned to the rooms,
after giving her orders, many guests were arriving, more
attracted by the charming hospitality of the countess than by
the distinguished position of the count; for, owing to the
good taste of Mercedes, one was sure of finding some
devices at her entertainment worthy of describing, or even
copying in case of need. Madame Danglars, in whom the
events we have related had caused deep anxiety, had
hesitated about going to Madame de Morcerf's, when during
the morning her carriage happened to meet that of Villefort.
The latter made a sign, and when the carriages had drawn
close together, said, -- "You are going to Madame de
Morcerf's, are you not?"
"No," replied Madame Danglars, "I am too ill."
"You are wrong," replied Villefort, significantly; "it is
important that you should be seen there."
"Do you think so?" asked the baroness.
"I do."
"In that case I will go." And the two carriages passed on
towards their different destinations. Madame Danglars
therefore came, not only beautiful in person, but radiant
with splendor; she entered by one door at the time when
Mercedes appeared at the door. The countess took Albert to
meet Madame Danglars. He approached, paid her some well
merited compliments on her toilet, and offered his arm to
conduct her to a seat. Albert looked around him. "You are
looking for my daughter?" said the baroness, smiling.

THE BALL

The Ball
"Seventeen!" replied Albert.
"What do you mean?"
"I only mean that the count seems the rage," replied the
viscount, smiling, "and that you are the seventeenth person
that has asked me the same question. The count is in fashion;
I congratulate him upon it."
"And have you replied to every one as you have to me?"
"Ah, to be sure, I have not answered you; be satisfied, we
shall have this `lion;' we are among the privileged ones."
"Were you at the opera yesterday?"
"No."
"He was there."
"Ah, indeed? And did the eccentric person commit any new
originality?"
"Can he be seen without doing so? Elssler was dancing in the
`Diable Boiteux;' the Greek princess was in ecstasies. After
the cachucha he placed a magnificent ring on the stem of a
bouquet, and threw it to the charming danseuse, who, in the
third act, to do honor to the gift, reappeared with it on her
finger. And the Greek princess, -- will she be here?"
"No, you will be deprived of that pleasure; her position in
the count's establishment is not sufficiently understood."
"Wait; leave me here, and go and speak to Madame de
Villefort, who is trying to attract your attention."
Albert bowed to Madame Danglars, and advanced towards
Madame de Villefort, whose lips opened as he approached.
"I wager anything," said Albert, interrupting her, "that I
know what you were about to say."
"Well, what is it?"
"If I guess rightly, will you confess it?"
"Yes."
"On your honor?"
"On my honor."
"You were going to ask me if the Count of Monte Cristo had
arrived, or was expected."
"Not at all. It is not of him that I am now thinking. I was
going to ask you if you had received any news of Monsieur
Franz."
"Yes, -- yesterday."
"What did he tell you?"
"That he was leaving at the same time as his letter."
"Well, now then, the count?"
"The count will come, of that you may be satisfied."

"I confess it," replied Albert. "Could you have been so cruel
as not to bring her?"

"You know that he has another name besides Monte Cristo?"

"Well, what do you wish to know?"

"Well, then, I am better informed than you; his name is
Zaccone."

"No, I did not know it."
"Calm yourself. She has met Mademoiselle de Villefort, and
"Monte Cristo in the name of an island, and he has a family
has taken her arm; see, they are following us, both in white
name."
dresses, one with a bouquet of camellias, the other with one
"I never heard it."
of myosotis. But tell me" -"Will not the Count of Monte Cristo be here to-night?"
288

"It is possible."
"He is a Maltese."
"That is also possible.
"The son of a shipowner."
"Really, you should relate all this aloud, you would have the
greatest success."
"He served in India, discovered a mine in Thessaly, and
comes to Paris to establish a mineral water-cure at Auteuil."
"Well, I'm sure," said Morcerf, "this is indeed news! Am I
allowed to repeat it?"
"Yes, but cautiously, tell one thing at a time, and do not say I
told you."
"Why so?"
"Because it is a secret just discovered."
"By whom?"
"The police."
"Then the news originated" -"At the prefect's last night. Paris, you can understand, is
astonished at the sight of such unusual splendor, and the
police have made inquiries."

chiselled with such marvellous delicacy, which so easily
expressed such high disdain, -- these were what fixed the
attention of all upon him. Many men might have been
handsomer, but certainly there could be none whose
appearance was more significant, if the expression may be
used. Everything about the count seemed to have its
meaning, for the constant habit of thought which he had
acquired had given an ease and vigor to the expression of his
face, and even to the most trifling gesture, scarcely to be
understood. Yet the Parisian world is so strange, that even
all this might not have won attention had there not been
connected with it a mysterious story gilded by an immense
fortune.
Meanwhile he advanced through the assemblage of guests
under a battery of curious glances towards Madame de
Morcerf, who, standing before a mantle-piece ornamented
with flowers, had seen his entrance in a looking-glass placed
opposite the door, and was prepared to receive him. She
turned towards him with a serene smile just at the moment
he was bowing to her. No doubt she fancied the count would
speak to her, while on his side the count thought she was
about to address him; but both remained silent, and after a
mere bow, Monte Cristo directed his steps to Albert, who
received him cordially. "Have you seen my mother?" asked
Albert.

"Well, well! Nothing more is wanting than to arrest the count "I have just had the pleasure," replied the count; "but I have
as a vagabond, on the pretext of his being too rich."
not seen your father."
"Indeed, that doubtless would have happened if his
credentials had not been so favorable."

"See, he is down there, talking politics with that little group
of great geniuses."

"Poor count! And is he aware of the danger he has been in?"

"Indeed?" said Monte Cristo; "and so those gentlemen down
there are men of great talent. I should not have guessed it.
And for what kind of talent are they celebrated? You know
there are different sorts."

"I think not."
"Then it will be but charitable to inform him. When he
arrives, I will not fail to do so."
Just then, a handsome young man, with bright eyes, black
hair, and glossy mustache, respectfully bowed to Madame
de Villefort. Albert extended his hand. "Madame," said
Albert, "allow me to present to you M. Maximilian Morrel,
captain of Spahis, one of our best, and, above all, of our
bravest officers."
"I have already had the pleasure of meeting this gentleman
at Auteuil, at the house of the Count of Monte Cristo,"
replied Madame de Villefort, turning away with marked
coldness of manner. This answer, and especially the tone in
which it was uttered, chilled the heart of poor Morrel. But a
recompense was in store for him; turning around, he saw
near the door a beautiful fair face, whose large blue eyes
were, without any marked expression, fixed upon him, while
the bouquet of myosotis was gently raised to her lips.
The salutation was so well understood that Morrel, with the
same expression in his eyes, placed his handkerchief to his
mouth; and these two living statues, whose hearts beat so
violently under their marble aspect, separated from each
other by the whole length of the room, forgot themselves for
a moment, or rather forgot the world in their mutual
contemplation. They might have remained much longer lost
in one another, without any one noticing their abstraction.
The Count of Monte Cristo had just entered.
We have already said that there was something in the count
which attracted universal attention wherever he appeared. It
was not the coat, unexceptional in its cut, though simple and
unornamented; it was not the plain white waistcoat; it was
not the trousers, that displayed the foot so perfectly formed
-- it was none of these things that attracted the attention, -- it
was his pale complexion, his waving black hair, his calm and
serene expression, his dark and melancholy eye, his mouth,

"That tall, harsh-looking man is very learned, he discovered,
in the neighborhood of Rome, a kind of lizard with a
vertebra more than lizards usually have, and he immediately
laid his discovery before the Institute. The thing was
discussed for a long time, but finally decided in his favor. I
can assure you the vertebra made a great noise in the learned
world, and the gentleman, who was only a knight of the
Legion of Honor, was made an officer."
"Come," said Monte Cristo, "this cross seems to me to be
wisely awarded. I suppose, had he found another additional
vertebra, they would have made him a commander."
"Very likely," said Albert.
"And who can that person be who has taken it into his head
to wrap himself up in a blue coat embroidered with green?"
"Oh, that coat is not his own idea; it is the Republic's, which
deputed David* to devise a uniform for the Academicians."
* Louis David, a famous French painter.
"Indeed?" said Monte Cristo; "so this gentleman is an
Academician?"
"Within the last week he has been made one of the learned
assembly."
"And what is his especial talent?"
"His talent? I believe he thrusts pins through the heads of
rabbits, he makes fowls eat madder, and punches the spinal
marrow out of dogs with whalebone."
"And he is made a member of the Academy of Sciences for
this?"
"No; of the French Academy."
"But what has the French Academy to do with all this?"
289


CHAPTER 70

"I was going to tell you. It seems" --

THE BALL

"Hush, do not mention these things," said Danglars; then,
approaching Monte Cristo, he added, "especially before
"That his experiments have very considerably advanced the
young M. Cavalcanti;" after which he smiled, and turned
cause of science, doubtless?"
towards the young man in question. Albert had left the
"No; that his style of writing is very good."
count to speak to his mother, Danglars to converse with
"This must be very flattering to the feelings of the rabbits young Cavalcanti; Monte Cristo was for an instant alone.
into whose heads he has thrust pins, to the fowls whose Meanwhile the heat became excessive. The footmen were
bones he has dyed red, and to the dogs whose spinal hastening through the rooms with waiters loaded with ices.
Monte Cristo wiped the perspiration from his forehead, but
marrow he has punched out?"
drew back when the waiter was presented to him; he took no
Albert laughed.
refreshment. Madame de Morcerf did not lose sight of Monte
Cristo; she saw that he took nothing, and even noticed his
"And the other one?" demanded the count.
gesture of refusal.
"That one?"
"Albert," she asked, "did you notice that?"
"Yes, the third."
"What, mother?"
"The one in the dark blue coat?"
"That the count has never been willing to partake of food
"Yes."
under the roof of M. de Morcerf."
"He is a colleague of the count, and one of the most active
"Yes; but then he breakfasted with me -- indeed, he made his
opponents to the idea of providing the Chamber of Peers
first appearance in the world on that occasion."
with a uniform. He was very successful upon that question.
He stood badly with the Liberal papers, but his noble "But your house is not M. de Morcerf's," murmured
opposition to the wishes of the court is now getting him into Mercedes; "and since he has been here I have watched him."
favor with the journalists. They talk of making him an "Well?"
ambassador."
"Well, he has taken nothing yet."
"And what are his claims to the peerage?"
"The count is very temperate." Mercedes smiled sadly.
"He has composed two or three comic operas, written four or "Approach him," said she, "and when the next waiter passes,
five articles in the Siecle, and voted five or six years on the insist upon his taking something."
ministerial side."
"But why, mother?"
"Bravo, Viscount," said Monte Cristo, smiling; "you are a
delightful cicerone. And now you will do me a favor, will "Just to please me, Albert," said Mercedes. Albert kissed his
mother's hand, and drew near the count. Another salver
you not?"
passed, loaded like the preceding ones; she saw Albert
"What is it?"
attempt to persuade the count, but he obstinately refused.
"Do not introduce me to any of these gentlemen; and should Albert rejoined his mother; she was very pale.
they wish it, you will warn me." Just then the count felt his "Well," said she, "you see he refuses?"
arm pressed. He turned round; it was Danglars.
"Yes; but why need this annoy you?"
"Ah, is it you, baron?" said he.
"You know, Albert, women are singular creatures. I should
"Why do you call me baron?" said Danglars; "you know that like to have seen the count take something in my house, if
I care nothing for my title. I am not like you, viscount; you only an ice. Perhaps he cannot reconcile himself to the
like your title, do you not?"
French style of living, and might prefer something else."
"Certainly," replied Albert, "seeing that without my title I "Oh, no; I have seen him eat of everything in Italy; no doubt
should be nothing; while you, sacrificing the baron, would he does not feel inclined this evening."
still remain the millionaire."
"And besides," said the countess, "accustomed as he is to
"Which seems to me the finest title under the royalty of July," burning climates, possibly he does not feel the heat as we
replied Danglars.
do."
"Unfortunately," said Monte Cristo, "one's title to a "I do not think that, for he has complained of feeling almost
millionaire does not last for life, like that of baron, peer of suffocated, and asked why the Venetian blinds were not
France, or Academician; for example, the millionaires Franck opened as well as the windows."
& Poulmann, of Frankfort, who have just become
"In a word," said Mercedes, "it was a way of assuring me that
bankrupts."
his abstinence was intended." And she left the room. A
"Indeed?" said Danglars, becoming pale.
minute afterwards the blinds were thrown open, and
"Yes; I received the news this evening by a courier. I had through the jessamine and clematis that overhung the
about a million in their hands, but, warned in time, I window one could see the garden ornamented with lanterns,
and the supper laid under the tent. Dancers, players, talkers,
withdrew it a month ago."
all uttered an exclamation of joy -- every one inhaled with
"Ah, mon Dieu," exclaimed Danglars, "they have drawn on
delight the breeze that floated in. At the same time Mercedes
me for 200,000 francs!"
reappeared, paler than before, but with that imperturbable
"Well, you can throw out the draft; their signature is worth expression of countenance which she sometimes wore. She
five per cent."
went straight to the group of which her husband formed the
"Yes, but it is too late," said Danglars, "I have honored their centre. "Do not detain those gentlemen here, count," she said;
"they would prefer, I should think, to breathe in the garden
bills."
rather than suffocate here, since they are not playing."
"Then," said Monte Cristo, "here are 200,000 francs gone
"Ah," said a gallant old general, who, in 1809, had sung
after" -"Partant pour la Syrie," -- "we will not go alone to the
290

garden."

lasted for a century, so much was expressed in that one look.
He offered his arm to the countess; she took it, or rather just
"Then," said Mercedes, "I will lead the way." Turning
touched it with her little hand, and they together descended
towards Monte Cristo, she added, "count, will you oblige me
the steps, lined with rhododendrons and camellias. Behind
with your arm?" The count almost staggered at these simple
them, by another outlet, a group of about twenty persons
words; then he fixed his eyes on Mercedes. It was only a
rushed into the garden with loud exclamations of delight.
momentary glance, but it seemed to the countess to have

291


CHAPTER 71


Chapter 71

BREAD AND SALT

Bread And Salt

M

adame de Morcerf entered an archway of trees with that you have seen so much, travelled so far, and suffered so
her companion. It led through a grove of lindens to a deeply?"
conservatory.
"I have suffered deeply, madame," answered Monte Cristo.
"It was too warm in the room, was it not, count?" she asked.
"But now you are happy?"
"Yes, madame; and it was an excellent idea of yours to open
"Doubtless," replied the count, "since no one hears me
the doors and the blinds." As he ceased speaking, the count
complain."
felt the hand of Mercedes tremble. "But you," he said, "with
that light dress, and without anything to cover you but that "And your present happiness, has it softened your heart?"
gauze scarf, perhaps you feel cold?"
"My present happiness equals my past misery," said the
"Do you know where I am leading you?" said the countess,
without replying to the question.

count.

"We are going to the greenhouse that you see at the other
end of the grove."

"No one told me you were, but you have frequently been
seen at the opera with a young and lovely woman."

The count looked at Mercedes as if to interrogate her, but she
continued to walk on in silence, and he refrained from
speaking. They reached the building, ornamented with
magnificent fruits, which ripen at the beginning of July in
the artificial temperature which takes the place of the sun, so
frequently absent in our climate. The countess left the arm of
Monte Cristo, and gathered a bunch of Muscatel grapes. "See,
count," she said, with a smile so sad in its expression that
one could almost detect the tears on her eyelids -- "see, our
French grapes are not to be compared, I know, with yours of
Sicily and Cyprus, but you will make allowance for our
northern sun." The count bowed, but stepped back. "Do you
refuse?" said Mercedes, in a tremulous voice. "Pray excuse
me, madame," replied Monte Cristo, "but I never eat
Muscatel grapes."

"She is a slave whom I bought at Constantinople, madame,
the daughter of a prince. I have adopted her as my daughter,
having no one else to love in the world."

"Are you not married?" asked the countess. "I married?"
"No, madame," replied Monte Cristo; "but you see I make no exclaimed Monte Cristo, shuddering; "who could have told
you so?"
resistance."

Mercedes let them fall, and sighed. A magnificent peach was
hanging against an adjoining wall, ripened by the same
artificial heat. Mercedes drew near, and plucked the fruit.
"Take this peach, then," she said. The count again refused.
"What, again?" she exclaimed, in so plaintive an accent that it
seemed to stifle a sob; "really, you pain me."

"You live alone, then?"
"I do."
"You have no sister -- no son -- no father?"
"I have no one."
"How can you exist thus without any one to attach you to
life?"
"It is not my fault, madame. At Malta, I loved a young girl,
was on the point of marrying her, when war came and
carried me away. I thought she loved me well enough to
wait for me, and even to remain faithful to my memory.
When I returned she was married. This is the history of most
men who have passed twenty years of age. Perhaps my heart
was weaker than the hearts of most men, and I suffered
more than they would have done in my place; that is all."
The countess stopped for a moment, as if gasping for breath.
"Yes," she said, "and you have still preserved this love in
your heart -- one can only love once -- and did you ever see
her again?"

A long silence followed; the peach, like the grapes, fell to the
ground. "Count," added Mercedes with a supplicating glance,
"there is a beautiful Arabian custom, which makes eternal "Never."
friends of those who have together eaten bread and salt "Never?"
under the same roof."
"I never returned to the country where she lived."
"I know it, madame," replied the count; "but we are in France,
and not in Arabia, and in France eternal friendships are as "To Malta?"
rare as the custom of dividing bread and salt with one "Yes; Malta."
another."
"She is, then, now at Malta?"
"But," said the countess, breathlessly, with her eyes fixed on
"I think so."
Monte Cristo, whose arm she convulsively pressed with both
"And have you forgiven her for all she has made you suffer?"
hands, "we are friends, are we not?"
The count became pale as death, the blood rushed to his
heart, and then again rising, dyed his cheeks with crimson;
his eyes swam like those of a man suddenly dazzled.
"Certainly, we are friends," he replied; "why should we not
be?" The answer was so little like the one Mercedes desired,
that she turned away to give vent to a sigh, which sounded
more like a groan. "Thank you," she said. And they walked
on again. They went the whole length of the garden without
uttering a word. "Sir," suddenly exclaimed the countess, after
their walk had continued ten minutes in silence, "is it true
292

"Her, -- yes."
"But only her; do you then still hate those who separated
you?"
"I hate them? Not at all; why should I?" The countess placed
herself before Monte Cristo, still holding in her hand a
portion of the perfumed grapes. "Take some," she said.
"Madame, I never eat Muscatel grapes," replied Monte Cristo,
as if the subject had not been mentioned before. The countess
dashed the grapes into the nearest thicket, with a gesture of

despair. "Inflexible man!" she murmured. Monte Cristo
remained as unmoved as if the reproach had not been
addressed to him. Albert at this moment ran in. "Oh,
mother," he exclaimed, "such a misfortune his happened!"
"What? What has happened?" asked the countess, as though
awakening from a sleep to the realities of life; "did you say a
misfortune? Indeed, I should expect misfortunes."
"M. de Villefort is here."
"Well?"
"He comes to fetch his wife and daughter."
"Why so?"
"Because Madame de Saint-Meran is just arrived in Paris,
bringing the news of M. de Saint-Meran's death, which took
place on the first stage after he left Marseilles. Madame de
Villefort, who was in very good spirits, would neither
believe nor think of the misfortune, but Mademoiselle
Valentine, at the first words, guessed the whole truth,
notwithstanding all the precautions of her father; the blow
struck her like a thunderbolt, and she fell senseless."

coming here to hasten her marriage with Franz."
"Ah, indeed?"
"So Franz must wait. Why was not M. de Saint-Meran also
grandfather to Mademoiselle Danglars?"
"Albert, Albert," said Madame de Morcerf, in a tone of mild
reproof, "what are you saying? Ah, count, he esteems you so
highly, tell him that he has spoken amiss." And she took two
or three steps forward. Monte Cristo watched her with an air
so thoughtful, and so full of affectionate admiration, that she
turned back and grasped his hand; at the same time she
seized that of her son, and joined them together.
"We are friends; are we not?" she asked.
"Oh, madame, I do not presume to call myself your friend,
but at all times I am your most respectful servant." The
countess left with an indescribable pang in her heart, and
before she had taken ten steps the count saw her raise her
handkerchief to her eyes. "Do not my mother and you
agree?" asked Albert, astonished.

"On the contrary," replied the count, "did you not hear her
declare that we were friends?" They re-entered the
"And how was M. de Saint-Meran related to Mademoiselle
drawing-room, which Valentine and Madame de Villefort
de Villefort?" said the count.
had just quitted. It is perhaps needless to add that Morrel
"He was her grandfather on the mother's side. He was departed almost at the same time.

293


CHAPTER 72


Chapter 72

MADAME DE SAINT-MERAN

Madame De Saint-Meran

A

gloomy scene had indeed just passed at the house of M.
de Villefort. After the ladies had departed for the ball,
whither all the entreaties of Madame de Villefort had failed
in persuading him to accompany them, the procureur had
shut himself up in his study, according to his custom. with a
heap of papers calculated to alarm any one else, but which
generally scarcely satisfied his inordinate desires. But this
time the papers were a mere matter of form. Villefort had
secluded himself, not to study, but to reflect; and with the
door locked and orders given that he should not be
disturbed excepting for important business, he sat down in
his arm-chair and began to ponder over the events, the
remembrance of which had during the last eight days filled
his mind with so many gloomy thoughts and bitter
recollections. Then, instead of plunging into the mass of
documents piled before him, he opened the drawer of his
desk. touched a spring, and drew out a parcel of cherished
memoranda, amongst which he had carefully arranged, in
characters only known to himself, the names of all those who,
either in his political career, in money matters, at the bar, or
in his mysterious love affairs, had become his enemies.
Their number was formidable, now that he had begun to fear,
and yet these names, powerful though they were, had often
caused him to smile with the same kind of satisfaction
experienced by a traveller who from the summit of a
mountain beholds at his feet the craggy eminences, the
almost impassable paths, and the fearful chasms, through
which he has so perilously climbed. When he had run over
all these names in his memory, again read and studied them,
commenting meanwhile upon his lists, he shook his head.

had so long slept, -- the noise of a carriage sounded in the
yard, then he heard the steps of an aged person ascending
the stairs, followed by tears and lamentations, such as
servants always give vent to when they wish to appear
interested in their master's grief. He drew back the bolt of his
door, and almost directly an old lady entered, unannounced,
carrying her shawl on her arm, and her bonnet in her hand.
The white hair was thrown back from her yellow forehead,
and her eyes, already sunken by the furrows of age, now
almost disappeared beneath the eyelids swollen with grief.
"Oh, sir," she said; "oh, sir, what a misfortune! I shall die of it;
oh, yes, I shall certainly die of it!"
And then, falling upon the chair nearest the door, she burst
into a paroxysm of sobs. The servants, standing in the
doorway, not daring to approach nearer, were looking at
Noirtier's old servant, who had heard the noise from his
master's room, and run there also, remaining behind the
others. Villefort rose, and ran towards his mother-in-law, for
it was she.
"Why, what can have happened?" he exclaimed, "what has
thus disturbed you? Is M. de Saint-Meran with you?"
"M. de Saint-Meran is dead," answered the old marchioness,
without preface and without expression; she appeared to be
stupefied. Villefort drew back, and clasping his hands
together, exclaimed -- "Dead! -- so suddenly?"

"A week ago," continued Madame de Saint-Meran, "we went
out together in the carriage after dinner. M. de Saint-Meran
had been unwell for some days; still, the idea of seeing our
dear Valentine again inspired him with courage, and
"No," he murmured, "none of my enemies would have notwithstanding his illness he would leave. At six leagues
waited so patiently and laboriously for so long a space of from Marseilles, after having eaten some of the lozenges he
time, that they might now come and crush me with this is accustomed to take, he fell into such a deep sleep, that it
appeared to me unnatural; still I hesitated to wake him,
secret. Sometimes, as Hamlet says -although I fancied that his face was flushed, and that the
`Foul deeds will rise, Tho, all the earth o'erwhelm them to
veins of his temples throbbed more violently than usual.
men's eyes;'
However, as it became dark, and I could no longer see, I fell
but, like a phosphoric light, they rise but to mislead. The asleep; I was soon aroused by a piercing shriek, as from a
story has been told by the Corsican to some priest, who in person suffering in his dreams, and he suddenly threw his
his turn has repeated it. M. de Monte Cristo may have heard head back violently. I called the valet, I stopped the postilion,
it, and to enlighten himself -- but why should he wish to I spoke to M. de Saint-Meran, I applied my smelling-salts;
enlighten himself upon the subject?" asked Villefort, after a but all was over, and I arrived at Aix by the side of a corpse."
moment's reflection, "what interest can this M. de Monte Villefort stood with his mouth half open, quite stupefied.
Cristo or M. Zaccone, -- son of a shipowner of Malta,
"Of course you sent for a doctor?"
discoverer of a mine in Thessaly, now visiting Paris for the
first time, -- what interest, I say, can he take in discovering a "Immediately; but, as I have told you, it was too late."
gloomy, mysterious, and useless fact like this? However, "Yes; but then he could tell of what complaint the poor
among all the incoherent details given to me by the Abbe marquis had died."
Busoni and by Lord Wilmore, by that friend and that enemy,
one thing appears certain and clear in my opinion -- that in "Oh, yes, sir, he told me; it appears to have been an
no period, in no case, in no circumstance, could there have apoplectic stroke."
been any contact between him and me."
"And what did you do then?"
But Villefort uttered words which even he himself did not
believe. He dreaded not so much the revelation, for he could
reply to or deny its truth; -- he cared little for that mene,
tekel, upharsin, which appeared suddenly in letters of blood
upon the wall; -- but what he was really anxious for was to
discover whose hand had traced them. While he was
endeavoring to calm his fears, -- and instead of dwelling
upon the political future that had so often been the subject of
his ambitious dreams, was imagining a future limited to the
enjoyments of home, in fear of awakening the enemy that
294

"M. de Saint-Meran had always expressed a desire, in case
his death happened during his absence from Paris, that his
body might be brought to the family vault. I had him put
into a leaden coffin, and I am preceding him by a few days."
"Oh, my poor mother," said Villefort, "to have such duties to
perform at your age after such a blow!"
"God has supported me through all; and then, my dear
marquis, he would certainly have done everything for me
that I performed for him. It is true that since I left him, I

seem to have lost my senses. I cannot cry; at my age they say
that we have no more tears, -- still I think that when one is in
trouble one should have the power of weeping. Where is
Valentine. sir? It is on her account I am here; I wish to see
Valentine." Villefort thought it would be terrible to reply that
Valentine was at a ball; so he only said that she had gone out
with her step-mother, and that she should be fetched. "This
instant, sir -- this instant, I beseech you!" said the old lady.
Villefort placed the arm of Madame de Saint-Meran within
his own, and conducted her to his apartment. "Rest yourself,
mother," he said.
The marchioness raised her head at this word, and
beholding the man who so forcibly reminded her of her
deeply-regretted child, who still lived for her in Valentine,
she felt touched at the name of mother, and bursting into
tears, she fell on her knees before an arm-chair, where she
buried her venerable head. Villefort left her to the care of the
women, while old Barrois ran, half-scared, to his master; for
nothing frightens old people so much as when death relaxes
its vigilance over them for a moment in order to strike some
other old person. Then, while Madame de Saint-Meran
remained on her knees, praying fervently, Villefort sent for a
cab, and went himself to fetch his wife and daughter from
Madame de Morcerf's. He was so pale when he appeared at
the door of the ball-room, that Valentine ran to him, saying -"Oh, father, some misfortune has happened!"

his chest, apparently overwhelmed and thoughtful; then he
closed one eye, in token of inquiry. "Mademoiselle
Valentine?" Noirtier nodded his head. "She is at the ball, as
you know, since she came to say good-by to you in full
dress." Noirtier again closed his left eye. "Do you wish to see
her?" Noirtier again made an affirmative sign. "Well, they
have gone to fetch her, no doubt, from Madame de Morcerf's;
I will await her return, and beg her to come up here. Is that
what you wish for?"
"Yes," replied the invalid.
Barrois, therefore, as we have seen, watched for Valentine,
and informed her of her grandfather's wish. Consequently,
Valentine came up to Noirtier, on leaving Madame de
Saint-Meran, who in the midst of her grief had at last yielded
to fatigue and fallen into a feverish sleep. Within reach of her
hand they placed a small table upon which stood a bottle of
orangeade, her usual beverage, and a glass. Then, as we have
said, the young girl left the bedside to see M. Noirtier.
Valentine kissed the old man, who looked at her with such
tenderness that her eyes again filled with tears, whose
sources he thought must be exhausted. The old gentleman
continued to dwell upon her with the same expression. "Yes,
yes," said Valentine, "you mean that I have yet a kind
grandfather left, do you not." The old man intimated that
such was his meaning. "Ah, yes, happily I have," replied
Valentine. "Without that, what would become of me?"

"Your grandmamma has just arrived, Valentine," said M. de It was one o'clock in the morning. Barrois, who wished to go
Villefort.
to bed himself, observed that after such sad events every one
stood in need of rest. Noirtier would not say that the only
"And grandpapa?" inquired the young girl, trembling with
rest he needed was to see his child, but wished her
apprehension. M. de Villefort only replied by offering his
good-night, for grief and fatigue had made her appear quite
arm to his daughter. It was just in time, for Valentine's head
ill. The next morning she found her grandmother in bed; the
swam, and she staggered; Madame de Villefort instantly
fever had not abated, on the contrary her eyes glistened and
hastened to her assistance, and aided her husband in
she appeared to be suffering from violent nervous irritability.
dragging her to the carriage, saying -- "What a singular event!
"Oh, dear grandmamma, are you worse?" exclaimed
Who could have thought it? Ah, yes, it is indeed strange!"
Valentine, perceiving all these signs of agitation.
And the wretched family departed, leaving a cloud of
sadness hanging over the rest of the evening. At the foot of "No, my child, no," said Madame de Saint-Meran; "but I was
the stairs, Valentine found Barrois awaiting her.
impatiently waiting for your arrival, that I might send for
your father."
"M. Noirtier wishes to see you to-night, he said, in an
undertone.
"My father?" inquired Valentine, uneasily.
"Tell him I will come when I leave my dear grandmamma,"
she replied, feeling, with true delicacy, that the person to
whom she could be of the most service just then was
Madame de Saint-Meran. Valentine found her grandmother
in bed; silent caresses, heartwrung sobs, broken sighs,
burning tears, were all that passed in this sad interview,
while Madame de Villefort, leaning on her husband's arm,
maintained all outward forms of respect, at least towards the
poor widow. She soon whispered to her husband, "I think it
would be better for me to retire, with your permission, for
the sight of me appears still to afflict your mother-in-law."
Madame de Saint-Meran heard her. "Yes, yes," she said softly
to Valentine, "let her leave; but do you stay." Madame de
Villefort left, and Valentine remained alone beside the bed,
for the procureur, overcome with astonishment at the
unexpected death, had followed his wife. Meanwhile,
Barrois had returned for the first time to old Noirtier, who
having heard the noise in the house, had, as we have said,
sent his old servant to inquire the cause; on his return, his
quick intelligent eye interrogated the messenger. "Alas, sir,"
exclaimed Barrois, "a great misfortune has happened.
Madame de Saint-Meran has arrived, and her husband is
dead!"

"Yes, I wish to speak to him." Valentine durst not oppose her
grandmother's wish, the cause of which she did not know,
and an instant afterwards Villefort entered. "Sir," said
Madame de Saint-Meran, without using any circumlocution,
and as if fearing she had no time to lose, "you wrote to me
concerning the marriage of this child?"

M. de Saint-Meran and Noirtier had never been on strict
terms of friendship; still, the death of one old man always
considerably affects another. Noirtier let his head fall upon

"Is it a suitable match?"

"Yes, madame," replied Villefort, "it is not only projected but
arranged."
"Your intended son-in-law is named M. Franz d'Epinay?"
"Yes, madame."
"Is he not the son of General d'Epinay who was on our side,
and who was assassinated some days before the usurper
returned from the Island of Elba?"
"The same."
"Does he not dislike the idea of marrying the granddaughter
of a Jacobin?"
"Our civil dissensions are now happily extinguished,
mother," said Villefort; "M. d'Epinay was quite a child when
his father died, he knows very little of M. Noirtier, and will
meet him, if not with pleasure, at least with indifference."
"In every respect."
295


CHAPTER 72


MADAME DE SAINT-MERAN

"And the young man?"
"Is regarded with universal esteem."
"You approve of him?"
"He is one of the most well-bred young men I know." During
the whole of this conversation Valentine had remained silent.
"Well, sir," said Madame de Saint-Meran, after a few
minutes' reflection, "I must hasten the marriage, for I have
but a short time to live."
"You, madame?" "You, dear mamma?" exclaimed M. de
Villefort and Valentine at the same time.
"I know what I am saying," continued the marchioness; "I
must hurry you, so that, as she has no mother, she may at
least have a grandmother to bless her marriage. I am all that
is left to her belonging to my poor Renee, whom you have so
soon forgotten, sir."
"Ah, madame," said Villefort, "you forget that I was obliged
to give a mother to my child."

"So little was it a dream, that I stretched my hand towards
the bell; but when I did so, the shade disappeared; my maid
then entered with a light."
"But she saw no one?"
"Phantoms are visible to those only who ought to see them. It
was the soul of my husband! -- Well, if my husband's soul
can come to me, why should not my soul reappear to guard
my granddaughter? the tie is even more direct, it seems to
me."
"Oh, madame," said Villefort, deeply affected, in spite of
himself, "do not yield to those gloomy thoughts; you will
long live with us, happy, loved, and honored, and we will
make you forget" -"Never, never, never," said the marchioness. "when does M.
d'Epinay return?"
"We expect him every moment."

"It is well. As soon as he arrives inform me. We must be
expeditious. And then I also wish to see a notary, that I may
"A stepmother is never a mother, sir. But this is not to the
be assured that all our property returns to Valentine."
purpose, -- our business concerns Valentine, let us leave the
dead in peace."
"Ah, grandmamma," murmured Valentine, pressing her lips
on the burning brow, "do you wish to kill me? Oh, how
All this was said with such exceeding rapidity, that there
feverish you are; we must not send for a notary, but for a
was something in the conversation that seemed like the
doctor."
beginning of delirium.
"A doctor?" said she, shrugging her shoulders, "I am not ill; I
"It shall be as you wish, madame," said Villefort; "more
am thirsty -- that is all."
especially since your wishes coincide with mine, and as soon
as M. d'Epinay arrives in Paris" -"What are you drinking, dear grandmamma?"
"My dear grandmother," interrupted Valentine, "consider
decorum -- the recent death. You would not have me marry
under such sad auspices?"

"The same as usual, my dear, my glass is there on the table -give it to me, Valentine." Valentine poured the orangeade
into a glass and gave it to her grandmother with a certain
degree of dread, for it was the same glass she fancied that
"My child," exclaimed the old lady sharply, "let us hear none
had been touched by the spectre. The marchioness drained
of the conventional objections that deter weak minds from
the glass at a single draught, and then turned on her pillow,
preparing for the future. I also was married at the death-bed
repeating, -- "The notary, the notary!"
of my mother, and certainly I have not been less happy on
that account."
M. de Villefort left the room, and Valentine seated herself at
the bedside of her grandmother. The poor child appeared
herself to require the doctor she had recommended to her
"Still that idea of death, madame," said Villefort.
aged relative. A bright spot burned in either cheek, her
"Still? -- Always! I tell you I am going to die -- do you respiration was short and difficult, and her pulse beat with
understand? Well, before dying, I wish to see my son-in-law. feverish excitement. She was thinking of the despair of
I wish to tell him to make my child happy; I wish to read in Maximilian, when he should be informed that Madame de
his eyes whether he intends to obey me; -- in fact, I will Saint-Meran, instead of being an ally, was unconsciously
know him -- I will!" continued the old lady, with a fearful acting as his enemy. More than once she thought of
expression, "that I may rise from the depths of my grave to revealing all to her grandmother, and she would not have
hesitated a moment, if Maximilian Morrel had been named
find him, if he should not fulfil his duty!"
Albert de Morcerf or Raoul de Chateau-Renaud; but Morrel
"Madame," said Villefort, "you must lay aside these exalted was of plebeian extraction, and Valentine knew how the
ideas, which almost assume the appearance of madness. The haughty Marquise de Saint-Meran despised all who were
dead, once buried in their graves, rise no more."
not noble. Her secret had each time been repressed when she
"And I tell you, sir, that you are mistaken. This night I have was about to reveal it, by the sad conviction that it would be
had a fearful sleep. It seemed as though my soul were useless to do so; for, were it once discovered by her father
already hovering over my body, my eyes, which I tried to and mother, all would be lost. Two hours passed thus;
open, closed against my will, and what will appear Madame de Saint-Meran was in a feverish sleep, and the
impossible above all to you, sir, I saw, with my eyes shut, in notary had arrived. Though his coming was announced in a
the spot where you are now standing, issuing from that very low tone, Madame de Saint-Meran arose from her
corner where there is a door leading into Madame Villefort's pillow. "The notary!" she exclaimed, "let him come in."
dressing-room -- I saw, I tell you, silently enter, a white The notary, who was at the door, immediately entered. "Go,
figure." Valentine screamed. "It was the fever that disturbed Valentine," said Madame de Saint-Meran, "and leave me
you, madame," said Villefort.
with this gentleman."
"Doubt, if you please, but I am sure of what I say. I saw a "But, grandmamma" -white figure, and as if to prevent my discrediting the
testimony of only one of my senses, I heard my glass "Leave me -- go!" The young girl kissed her grandmother,
and left with her handkerchief to her eyes; at the door she
removed -- the same which is there now on the table."
found the valet de chambre, who told her that the doctor
"Oh, dear mother, it was a dream."
was waiting in the dining-room. Valentine instantly ran
down. The doctor was a friend of the family, and at the same
296

time one of the cleverest men of the day, and very fond of
Valentine, whose birth he had witnessed. He had himself a
daughter about her age, but whose life was one continued
source of anxiety and fear to him from her mother having
been consumptive.

"And the same love for you -- eh, my dear child?"

"Oh," said Valentine, "we have been waiting for you with
such impatience, dear M. d'Avrigny. But, first of all, how are
Madeleine and Antoinette?" Madeleine was the daughter of
M. d'Avrigny, and Antoinette his niece. M. d'Avrigny smiled
sadly. "Antoinette is very well," he said, "and Madeleine
tolerably so. But you sent for me, my dear child. It is not
your father or Madame de Villefort who is ill. As for you,
although we doctors cannot divest our patients of nerves, I
fancy you have no further need of me than to recommend
you not to allow your imagination to take too wide a field."
Valentine colored. M. d'Avrigny carried the science of
divination almost to a miraculous extent, for he was one of
the physicians who always work upon the body through the
mind. "No," she replied, "it is for my poor grandmother. You
know the calamity that has happened to us, do you not?"

"An extreme nervous excitement and a strangely agitated
sleep; she fancied this morning in her sleep that her soul was
hovering above her body, which she at the same time
watched. It must have been delirium; she fancies, too, that
she saw a phantom enter her chamber and even heard the
noise it made on touching her glass."

"I know nothing." said M. d'Avrigny.
"Alas," said Valentine, restraining her tears, "my grandfather
is dead."

"Yes," said Valentine, "he was very fond of me."
"Who does not love you?" Valentine smiled sadly. "What are
your grandmother's symptoms?"

"It is singular," said the doctor; "I was not aware that
Madame de Saint-Meran was subject to such hallucinations."
"It is the first time I ever saw her in this condition," said
Valentine; "and this morning she frightened me so that I
thought her mad; and my father, who you know is a
strong-minded man, himself appeared deeply impressed."
"We will go and see," said the doctor; "what you tell me
seems very strange." The notary here descended, and
Valentine was informed that her grandmother was alone.
"Go upstairs," she said to the doctor.
"And you?"

"Oh, I dare not -- she forbade my sending for you; and, as
you say, I am myself agitated, feverish and out of sorts. I will
"Yes."
go and take a turn in the garden to recover myself." The
doctor pressed Valentine's hand, and while he visited her
"Suddenly?"
grandmother, she descended the steps. We need not say
"From an apoplectic stroke."
which portion of the garden was her favorite walk. After
"An apoplectic stroke?" repeated the doctor.
remaining for a short time in the parterre surrounding the
house, and gathering a rose to place in her waist or hair, she
"Yes, and my poor grandmother fancies that her husband,
turned into the dark avenue which led to the bench; then
whom she never left, has called her, and that she must go
from the bench she went to the gate. As usual, Valentine
and join him. Oh, M. d'Avrigny, I beseech you, do something
strolled for a short time among her flowers, but without
for her!"
gathering them. The mourning in her heart forbade her
"Where is she?"
assuming this simple ornament, though she had not yet had
time to put on the outward semblance of woe. She then
"In her room with the notary."
turned towards the avenue. As she advanced she fancied she
"And M. Noirtier?"
heard a voice speaking her name. She stopped astonished,
"Just as he was, his mind perfectly clear, but the same then the voice reached her ear more distinctly, and she
recognized it to be that of Maximilian.
incapability of moving or speaking."
"M. de Saint-Meran?"

297


CHAPTER 73


Chapter 73

I

t was, indeed, Maximilian Morrel, who had passed a
wretched existence since the previous day. With the
instinct peculiar to lovers he had anticipated after the return
of Madame de Saint-Meran and the death of the marquis,
that something would occur at M. de Villefort's in
connection with his attachment for Valentine. His
presentiments were realized, as we shall see, and his uneasy
forebodings had goaded him pale and trembling to the gate
under the chestnut-trees. Valentine was ignorant of the cause
of this sorrow and anxiety, and as it was not his accustomed
hour for visiting her, she had gone to the spot simply by
accident or perhaps through sympathy. Morrel called her,
and she ran to the gate. "You here at this hour?" said she.
"Yes, my poor girl," replied Morrel; "I come to bring and to
hear bad tidings."
"This is, indeed, a house of mourning," said Valentine;
"speak, Maximilian, although the cup of sorrow seems
already full."
"Dear Valentine," said Morrel, endeavoring to conceal his
own emotion, "listen, I entreat you; what I am about to say is
very serious. When are you to be married?"
"I will tell you all," said Valentine; "from you I have nothing
to conceal. This morning the subject was introduced, and my
dear grandmother, on whom I depended as my only support,
not only declared herself favorable to it, but is so anxious for
it, that they only await the arrival of M. d'Epinay, and the
following day the contract will be signed." A deep sigh
escaped the young man, who gazed long and mournfully at
her he loved. "Alas," replied he, "it is dreadful thus to hear
my condemnation from your own lips. The sentence is
passed, and, in a few hours, will be executed; it must be so,
and I will not endeavor to prevent it. But, since you say
nothing remains but for M. d'Epinay to arrive that the
contract may be signed, and the following day you will be
his, to-morrow you will be engaged to M. d'Epinay, for he
came this morning to Paris." Valentine uttered a cry.
"I was at the house of Monte Cristo an hour since," said
Morrel; "we were speaking, he of the sorrow your family had
experienced, and I of your grief, when a carriage rolled into
the court-yard. Never, till then, had I placed any confidence
in presentiments, but now I cannot help believing them,
Valentine. At the sound of that carriage I shuddered; soon I
heard steps on the staircase, which terrified me as much as
the footsteps of the commander did Don Juan. The door at
last opened; Albert de Morcerf entered first, and I began to
hope my fears were vain, when, after him, another young
man advanced, and the count exclaimed -- `Ah, here is the
Baron Franz d'Epinay!' I summoned all my strength and
courage to my support. Perhaps I turned pale and trembled,
but certainly I smiled; and five minutes after I left, without
having heard one word that had passed."
"Poor Maximilian!" murmured Valentine.
"Valentine, the time has arrived when you must answer me.
And remember my life depends on your answer. What do
you intend doing?" Valentine held down her head; she was
overwhelmed.
"Listen," said Morrel; "it is not the first time you have
contemplated our present position, which is a serious and
urgent one; I do not think it is a moment to give way to
useless sorrow; leave that for those who like to suffer at their

298

THE PROMISE

The Promise
leisure and indulge their grief in secret. There are such in the
world, and God will doubtless reward them in heaven for
their resignation on earth, but those who mean to contend
must not lose one precious moment, but must return
immediately the blow which fortune strikes. Do you intend
to struggle against our ill-fortune? Tell me, Valentine for it is
that I came to know."
Valentine trembled, and looked at him with amazement. The
idea of resisting her father, her grandmother, and all the
family, had never occurred to her. "What do you say,
Maximilian?" asked Valentine. "What do you mean by a
struggle? Oh, it would be a sacrilege. What? I resist my
father's order, and my dying grandmother's wish?
Impossible!" Morrel started. "You are too noble not to
understand me, and you understand me so well that you
already yield, dear Maximilian. No, no; I shall need all my
strength to struggle with myself and support my grief in
secret, as you say. But to grieve my father -- to disturb my
grandmother's last moments -- never!"
"You are right," said Morrel, calmly.
"In what a tone you speak!" cried Valentine.
"I speak as one who admires you, mademoiselle."
"Mademoiselle," cried Valentine; "mademoiselle! Oh, selfish
man, -- he sees me in despair, and pretends he cannot
understand me!"
"You mistake -- I understand you perfectly. You will not
oppose M. Villefort, you will not displease the marchioness,
and to-morrow you will sign the contract which will bind
you to your husband."
"But, mon Dieu, tell me, how can I do otherwise?"
"Do not appeal to me, mademoiselle; I shall be a bad judge in
such a case; my selfishness will blind me," replied Morrel,
whose low voice and clinched hands announced his growing
desperation.
"What would you have proposed, Maximilian, had you
found me willing to accede?"
"It is not for me to say."
"You are wrong; you must advise me what to do."
"Do you seriously ask my advice, Valentine?"
"Certainly, dear Maximilian, for if it is good, I will follow it;
you know my devotion to you."
"Valentine," said Morrel pushing aside a loose plank, "give
me your hand in token of forgiveness of my anger; my
senses are confused, and during the last hour the most
extravagant thoughts have passed through my brain. Oh, if
you refuse my advice" -"What do you advise?" said Valentine, raising her eyes to
heaven and sighing. "I am free," replied Maximilian, "and
rich enough to support you. I swear to make you my lawful
wife before my lips even shall have approached your
forehead."
"You make me tremble!" said the young girl.
"Follow me," said Morrel; "I will take you to my sister, who
is worthy also to be yours. We will embark for Algiers, for
England, for America, or, if your prefer it, retire to the
country and only return to Paris when our friends have

reconciled your family." Valentine shook her head. "I feared
it, Maximilian," said she; "it is the counsel of a madman, and
I should be more mad than you, did I not stop you at once
with the word `Impossible, impossible!'"

would be folly. What has M. Franz to do with it? He saw me
this morning for the first time, and has already forgotten he
has seen me. He did not even know I existed when it was
arranged by your two families that you should be united. I
have no enmity against M. Franz, and promise you the
punishment shall not fall on him."

"You will then submit to what fate decrees for you without
even attempting to contend with it?" said Morrel sorrowfully.
"Yes, -- if I die!"
"On whom, then! -- on me?"
"Well, Valentine," resumed Maximilian, "I can only say again
that you are right. Truly, it is I who am mad, and you prove
to me that passion blinds the most well-meaning. I
appreciate your calm reasoning. It is then understood that
to-morrow you will be irrevocably promised to M. Franz
d'Epinay, not only by that theatrical formality invented to
heighten the effect of a comedy called the signature of the
contract, but your own will?"

"On you? Valentine! Oh, heaven forbid! Woman is sacred;
the woman one loves is holy."

"It cannot change, unhappy man; you know it must not!"
cried the young girl. "Then adieu, Valentine!" Valentine
shook the gate with a strength of which she could not have
been supposed to be possessed, as Morrel was going away,
and passing both her hands through the opening, she
clasped and wrung them. "I must know what you mean to
do!" said she. "Where are you going?"

"Adieu, Valentine," repeated Morrel.

"On yourself, then, unhappy man; on yourself?"
"I am the only guilty person, am I not?' said Maximilian.

"Maximilian!" said Valentine, "Maximilian, come back, I
entreat you!" He drew near with his sweet smile, and but for
his paleness one might have thought him in his usual happy
"Again you drive me to despair, Maximilian," said Valentine, mood. "Listen, my dear, my adored Valentine," said he in his
"again you plunge the dagger into the wound! What would melodious and grave tone; "those who, like us, have never
you do, tell me, if your sister listened to such a proposition?" had a thought for which we need blush before the world,
such may read each other's hearts. I never was romantic, and
"Mademoiselle," replied Morrel with a bitter smile, "I am
am no melancholy hero. I imitate neither Manfred nor
selfish -- you have already said so -- and as a selfish man I
Anthony; but without words, protestations, or vows, my life
think not of what others would do in my situation, but of
has entwined itself with yours; you leave me, and you are
what I intend doing myself. I think only that I have known
right in doing so, -- I repeat it, you are right; but in losing
you not a whole year. From the day I first saw you, all my
you, I lose my life.
hopes of happiness have been in securing your affection.
One day you acknowledged that you loved me, and since "The moment you leave me, Valentine, I am alone in the
that day my hope of future happiness has rested on world. My sister is happily married; her husband is only my
obtaining you, for to gain you would be life to me. Now, I brother-in-law, that is, a man whom the ties of social life
think no more; I say only that fortune has turned against me alone attach to me; no one then longer needs my useless life.
-- I had thought to gain heaven, and now I have lost it. It is This is what I shall do; I will wait until the very moment you
an every-day occurrence for a gambler to lose not only what are married, for I will not lose the shadow of one of those
he possesses but also what he has not." Morrel pronounced unexpected chances which are sometimes reserved for us,
these words with perfect calmness; Valentine looked at him since M. Franz may, after all, die before that time, a
a moment with her large, scrutinizing eyes, endeavoring not thunderbolt may fall even on the altar as you approach it, -to let Morrel discover the grief which struggled in her heart. nothing appears impossible to one condemned to die, and
miracles appear quite reasonable when his escape from
"But, in a word, what are you going to do?" asked she.
death is concerned. I will, then, wait until the last moment,
"I am going to have the honor of taking my leave of you,
and when my misery is certain, irremediable, hopeless, I will
mademoiselle, solemnly assuring you that I wish your life
write a confidential letter to my brother-in-law, another to
may be so calm, so happy, and so fully occupied, that there
the prefect of police, to acquaint them with my intention,
may be no place for me even in your memory."
and at the corner of some wood, on the brink of some abyss,
"Oh!" murmured Valentine.
on the bank of some river, I will put an end to my existence,
as certainly as I am the son of the most honest man who ever
"Adieu, Valentine, adieu!" said Morrel, bowing.
lived in France."
"Where are you going?" cried the young girl, extending her
Valentine trembled convulsively; she loosened her hold of
hand through the opening, and seizing Maximilian by his
the gate, her arms fell by her side, and two large tears rolled
coat, for she understood from her own agitated feelings that
down her cheeks. The young man stood before her,
her lover's calmness could not be real; "where are you
sorrowful and resolute. "Oh, for pity's sake," said she, "you
going?"
will live, will you not?"
"I am going, that I may not bring fresh trouble into your
"No, on my honor," said Maximilian; "but that will not affect
family: and to set an example which every honest and
you. You have done your duty, and your conscience will be
devoted man, situated as I am, may follow."
at rest." Valentine fell on her knees, and pressed her almost
"Before you leave me, tell me what you are going to do, bursting heart. "Maximilian," said she, "Maximilian, my
Maximilian." The young man smiled sorrowfully. "Speak, friend, my brother on earth, my true husband in heaven, I
speak!" said Valentine; "I entreat you."
entreat you, do as I do, live in suffering; perhaps we may one
day be united."
"Has your resolution changed, Valentine?"

"Oh, fear not," said Maximilian, stopping at a short distance,
"I do not intend to render another man responsible for the
rigorous fate reserved for me. Another might threaten to
seek M. Franz, to provoke him, and to fight with him; all that

"My God," said Valentine, raising both her hands to heaven
with a sublime expression, "I have done my utmost to
remain a submissive daughter; I have begged, entreated,
implored; he has regarded neither my prayers, my entreaties,
nor my tears. It is done," cried she, willing away her tears,
and resuming her firmness, "I am resolved not to die of
remorse, but rather of shame. Live, Maximilian, and I will be
yours. Say when shall it be? Speak, command, I will obey."
Morrel, who had already gone some few steps away, again
returned, and pale with joy extended both hands towards
299


CHAPTER 73

Valentine through the opening. "Valentine," said he, "dear
Valentine, you must not speak thus -- rather let me die. Why
should I obtain you by violence, if our love is mutual? Is it
from mere humanity you bid me live? I would then rather
die."
"Truly," murmured Valentine, "who on this earth cares for
me, if he does not? Who has consoled me in my sorrow but
he? On whom do my hopes rest? On whom does my
bleeding heart repose? On him, on him, always on him! Yes,
you are right, Maximilian, I will follow you. I will leave the
paternal home, I will give up all. Oh, ungrateful girl that I
am," cried Valentine, sobbing, "I will give up all, even my
dear old grandfather, whom I had nearly forgotten."
"No," said Maximilian, "you shall not leave him. M. Noirtier
has evinced, you say, a kind feeling towards me. Well, before
you leave, tell him all; his consent would be your
justification in God's sight. As soon as we are married, he
shall come and live with us, instead of one child, he shall
have two. You have told me how you talk to him and how
he answers you; I shall very soon learn that language by
signs, Valentine, and I promise you solemnly, that instead of
despair, it is happiness that awaits us."
"Oh, see, Maximilian, see the power you have over me, you
almost make me believe you; and yet, what you tell me is
madness, for my father will curse me -- he is inflexible -- he
will never pardon me. Now listen to me, Maximilian; if by
artifice, by entreaty, by accident -- in short, if by any means I
can delay this marriage, will you wait?"
"Yes, I promise you, as faithfully as you have promised me
that this horrible marriage shall not take place, and that if
you are dragged before a magistrate or a priest, you will
refuse."
"I promise you by all that is most sacred to me in the world,
namely, by my mother."

THE PROMISE
"Yes," said Valentine, "I will now acknowledge you are right,
Maximilian; and now are you satisfied with your betrothal?"
said the young girl sorrowfully.
"My adored Valentine, words cannot express one half of my
satisfaction." Valentine had approached, or rather, had
placed her lips so near the fence, that they nearly touched
those of Morrel, which were pressed against the other side of
the cold and inexorable barrier. "Adieu, then, till we meet
again," said Valentine, tearing herself away. "I shall hear
from you?"
"Yes."
"Thanks, thanks, dear love, adieu!" The sound of a kiss was
heard, and Valentine fled through the avenue. Morrel
listened to catch the last sound of her dress brushing the
branches, and of her footstep on the gravel, then raised his
eyes with an ineffable smile of thankfulness to heaven for
being permitted to be thus loved, and then also disappeared.
The young man returned home and waited all the evening
and all the next day without getting any message. It was
only on the following day, at about ten o'clock in the
morning, as he was starting to call on M. Deschamps, the
notary, that he received from the postman a small billet,
which he knew to be from Valentine, although he had not
before seen her writing. It was to this effect: -Tears, entreaties, prayers, have availed me nothing.
Yesterday, for two hours, I was at the church of
Saint-Phillippe du Roule, and for two hours I prayed most
fervently. Heaven is as inflexible as man, and the signature
of the contract is fixed for this evening at nine o'clock. I have
but one promise and but one heart to give; that promise is
pledged to you, that heart is also yours. This evening, then,
at a quarter to nine at the gate.
Your betrothed,
Valentine de Villefort.

"We will wait, then," said Morrel.

P.S. -- My poor grandmother gets worse and worse;
"Yes, we will wait," replied Valentine, who revived at these yesterday her fever amounted to delirium; to-day her
words; "there are so many things which may save unhappy delirium is almost madness. You will be very kind to me,
beings such as we are."
will you not, Morrel, to make me forget my sorrow in
leaving her thus? I think it is kept a secret from grandpapa
"I rely on you, Valentine," said Morrel; "all you do will be
Noirtier, that the contract is to be signed this evening.
well done; only if they disregard your prayers, if your father
and Madame de Saint-Meran insist that M. d'Epinay should Morrel went also to the notary, who confirmed the news that
be called to-morrow to sign the contract" -the contract was to be signed that evening. Then he went to
call on Monte Cristo and heard still more. Franz had been to
"Then you have my promise, Maximilian."
announce the ceremony, and Madame de Villefort had also
"Instead of signing" -written to beg the count to excuse her not inviting him; the
"I will go to you, and we will fly; but from this moment until death of M. de Saint-Meran and the dangerous illness of his
then, let us not tempt providence, let us not see each other. It widow would cast a gloom over the meeting which she
is a miracle, it is a providence that we have not been would regret should be shared by the count whom she
discovered. If we were surprised, if it were known that we wished every happiness. The day before Franz had been
presented to Madame de Saint-Meran, who had left her bed
met thus, we should have no further resource."
to receive him, but had been obliged to return to it
"You are right, Valentine; but how shall I ascertain?"
immediately after. It is easy to suppose that Morrel's
agitation would not escape the count's penetrating eye.
"From the notary, M. Deschamps."
Monte Cristo was more affectionate than ever, -- indeed, his
"I know him."
manner was so kind that several times Morrel was on the
"And for myself -- I will write to you, depend on me. I dread point of telling him all. But he recalled the promise he had
this marriage, Maximilian, as much as you."
made to Valentine, and kept his secret.
"Thank you, my adored Valentine, thank you; that is enough.
When once I know the hour, I will hasten to this spot, you
can easily get over this fence with my assistance, a carriage
will await us at the gate, in which you will accompany me to
my sister's; there living, retired or mingling in society, as you
wish, we shall be enabled to use our power to resist
oppression, and not suffer ourselves to be put to death like
sheep, which only defend themselves by sighs."
300

The young man read Valentine's letter twenty times in the
course of the day. It was her first, and on what an occasion!
Each time he read it he renewed his vow to make her happy.
How great is the power of a woman who has made so
courageous a resolution! What devotion does she deserve
from him for whom she has sacrificed everything! How
ought she really to be supremely loved! She becomes at once
a queen and a wife, and it is impossible to thank and love
her sufficiently. Morrel longed intensely for the moment

when he should hear Valentine say, "Here I am, Maximilian;
come and help me." He had arranged everything for her
escape; two ladders were hidden in the clover-field; a
cabriolet was ordered for Maximilian alone, without a
servant, without lights; at the turning of the first street they
would light the lamps, as it would be foolish to attract the
notice of the police by too many precautions. Occasionally he
shuddered; he thought of the moment when, from the top of
that wall, he should protect the descent of his dear Valentine,
pressing in his arms for the first time her of whom he had
yet only kissed the delicate hand.
When the afternoon arrived and he felt that the hour was
drawing near, he wished for solitude, his agitation was
extreme; a simple question from a friend would have
irritated him. He shut himself in his room, and tried to read,
but his eye glanced over the page without understanding a
word, and he threw away the book, and for the second time
sat down to sketch his plan, the ladders and the fence. At
length the hour drew near. Never did a man deeply in love
allow the clocks to go on peacefully. Morrel tormented his so
effectually that they struck eight at half-past six. He then
said, "It is time to start; the signature was indeed fixed to
take place at nine o'clock, but perhaps Valentine will not
wait for that. Consequently, Morrel, having left the Rue
Meslay at half-past eight by his timepiece, entered the
clover-field while the clock of Saint-Phillippe du Roule was
striking eight. The horse and cabriolet were concealed
behind a small ruin, where Morrel had often waited.
The night gradually drew on, and the foliage in the garden
assumed a deeper hue. Then Morrel came out from his
hiding-place with a beating heart, and looked through the
small opening in the gate; there was yet no one to be seen.
The clock struck half-past eight, and still another half-hour
was passed in waiting, while Morrel walked to and fro, and
gazed more and more frequently through the opening. The
garden became darker still, but in the darkness he looked in
vain for the white dress, and in the silence he vainly listened
for the sound of footsteps. The house, which was discernible
through the trees, remained in darkness, and gave no
indication that so important an event as the signature of a
marriage-contract was going on. Morrel looked at his watch,
which wanted a quarter to ten; but soon the same clock he
had already heard strike two or three times rectified the
error by striking half-past nine.

half-hour struck. It was impossible to wait longer, his
temples throbbed violently, his eyes were growing dim; he
passed one leg over the wall, and in a moment leaped down
on the other side. He was on Villefort's premises -- had
arrived there by scaling the wall. What might be the
consequences? However, he had not ventured thus far to
draw back. He followed a short distance close under the wall,
then crossed a path, hid entered a clump of trees. In a
moment he had passed through them, and could see the
house distinctly. Then Morrel saw that he had been right in
believing that the house was not illuminated. Instead of
lights at every window, as is customary on days of ceremony,
he saw only a gray mass, which was veiled also by a cloud,
which at that moment obscured the moon's feeble light. A
light moved rapidly from time to time past three windows of
the second floor. These three windows were in Madame de
Saint-Meran's room. Another remained motionless behind
some red curtains which were in Madame de Villefort's
bedroom. Morrel guessed all this. So many times, in order to
follow Valentine in thought at every hour in the day, had he
made her describe the whole house, that without having
seen it he knew it all.
This darkness and silence alarmed Morrel still more than
Valentine's absence had done. Almost mad with grief, and
determined to venture everything in order to see Valentine
once more, and be certain of the misfortune he feared,
Morrel gained the edge of the clump of trees, and was going
to pass as quickly as possible through the flower-garden,
when the sound of a voice, still at some distance, but which
was borne upon the wind, reached him.
At this sound, as he was already partially exposed to view,
he stepped back and concealed himself completely,
remaining perfectly motionless. He had formed his
resolution. If it was Valentine alone, he would speak as she
passed; if she was accompanied, and he could not speak, still
he should see her, and know that she was safe; if they were
strangers, he would listen to their conversation, and might
understand something of this hitherto incomprehensible
mystery. The moon had just then escaped from behind the
cloud which had concealed it, and Morrel saw Villefort come
out upon the steps, followed by a gentleman in black. They
descended, and advanced towards the clump of trees, and
Morrel soon recognized the other gentleman as Doctor
d'Avrigny.

This was already half an hour past the time Valentine had
fixed. It was a terrible moment for the young man. The
slightest rustling of the foliage, the least whistling of the
wind, attracted his attention, and drew the perspiration to
his brow; then he tremblingly fixed his ladder, and, not to
lose a moment, placed his foot on the first step. Amidst all
these alternations of hope and fear, the clock struck ten. "It is
impossible," said Maximilian, "that the signing of a contract
should occupy so long a time without unexpected
interruptions. I have weighed all the chances, calculated the
time required for all the forms; something must have
happened." And then he walked rapidly to and fro, and
pressed his burning forehead against the fence. Had
Valentine fainted? or had she been discovered and stopped
in her flight? These were the only obstacles which appeared
possible to the young man.

The young man, seeing them approach, drew back
mechanically, until he found himself stopped by a
sycamore-tree in the centre of the clump; there he was
compelled to remain. Soon the two gentlemen stopped also.

The idea that her strength had failed her in attempting to
escape, and that she had fainted in one of the paths, was the
one that most impressed itself upon his mind. "In that case,"
said he, "I should lose her, and by my own fault." He dwelt
on this idea for a moment, then it appeared reality. He even
thought he could perceive something on the ground at a
distance; he ventured to call, and it seemed to him that the
wind wafted back an almost inarticulate sigh. At last the

"I mean that behind the misfortune which has just happened
to you, there is another, perhaps, still greater."

"Ah, my dear doctor," said the procureur, "heaven declares
itself against my house! What a dreadful death -- what a
blow! Seek not to console me; alas, nothing can alleviate so
great a sorrow -- the wound is too deep and too fresh! Dead,
dead!" The cold sweat sprang to the young man's brow, and
his teeth chattered. Who could be dead in that house, which
Villefort himself had called accursed? "My dear M. de
Villefort," replied the doctor, with a tone which redoubled
the terror of the young man, "I have not led you here to
console you; on the contrary" -"What can you mean?" asked the procureur, alarmed.

"Can it be possible?" murmured Villefort, clasping his hands.
"What are you going to tell me?"
"Are we quite alone, my friend?"
"Yes, quite; but why all these precautions?"
301


CHAPTER 73


THE PROMISE

"Because I have a terrible secret to communicate to you," said thoroughly convinced that not only did her death proceed
the doctor. "Let us sit down."
from poison, but I could also specify the poison.'"
Villefort fell, rather than seated himself The doctor stood
before him, with one hand placed on his shoulder. Morrel,
horrified, supported his head with one hand, and with the
other pressed his heart, lest its beatings should be heard.
"Dead, dead!" repeated he within himself; and he felt as if he
were also dying.

"Can it be possible?"

at intervals of some minutes, each one more serious than the
former. When you arrived, Madame de Saint-Meran had
already been panting for breath some minutes; she then had
a fit, which I took to be simply a nervous attack, and it was
only when I saw her raise herself in the bed, and her limbs
and neck appear stiffened, that I became really alarmed.
Then I understood from your countenance there was more to
fear than I had thought. This crisis past, I endeavored to
catch your eye, but could not. You held her hand -- you were
feeling her pulse -- and the second fit came on before you
had turned towards me. This was more terrible than the first;
the same nervous movements were repeated, and the mouth
contracted and turned purple."

"It could not indeed, my daughter is her only heiress -Valentine alone. Oh, if such a thought could present itself, I
would stab myself to punish my heart for having for one
instant harbored it."

"The symptoms are marked, do you see? -- sleep broken by
nervous spasms, excitation of the brain, torpor of the nerve
centres. Madame de Saint-Meran succumbed to a powerful
dose of brucine or of strychnine, which by some mistake,
perhaps, has been given to her." Villefort seized the doctor's
"Speak, doctor -- I am listening," said Villefort; "strike -- I am hand. "Oh, it is impossible," said he, "I must be dreaming! It
prepared for everything!"
is frightful to hear such things from such a man as you! Tell
me, I entreat you, my dear doctor, that you may be
"Madame de Saint-Meran was, doubtless, advancing in years,
deceived."
but she enjoyed excellent health." Morrel began again to
breathe freely, which he had not done during the last ten "Doubtless I may, but" -minutes.
"But?"
"Grief has consumed her," said Villefort -- "yes, grief, doctor!
"But I do not think so."
After living forty years with the marquis" -"Have pity on me doctor! So many dreadful things have
"It is not grief, my dear Villefort," said the doctor; "grief may
happened to me lately that I am on the verge of madness."
kill, although it rarely does, and never in a day, never in an
hour, never in ten minutes." Villefort answered nothing, he "Has any one besides me seen Madame de Saint-Meran?"
simply raised his head, which had been cast down before, "No."
and looked at the doctor with amazement.
"Has anything been sent for from a chemist's that I have not
"Were you present during the last struggle?" asked M. examined?"
d'Avrigny.
"Nothing."
"I was," replied the procureur; "you begged me not to leave."
"Had Madame de Saint-Meran any enemies?"
"Did you notice the symptoms of the disease to which
"Not to my knowledge."
Madame de Saint-Meran has fallen a victim?"
"I did. Madame de Saint-Meran had three successive attacks, "Would her death affect any one's interest?"

"And at the third she expired."

"Indeed, my dear friend," said M. d'Avrigny, "I would not
accuse any one; I speak only of an accident, you understand,
-- of a mistake, -- but whether accident or mistake, the fact is
there; it is on my conscience and compels me to speak aloud
to you. Make inquiry."
"Of whom? -- how? -- of what?"
"May not Barrois, the old servant, have made a mistake, and
have given Madame de Saint-Meran a dose prepared for his
master?"

"At the end of the first attack I discovered symptoms of "For my father?"
tetanus; you confirmed my opinion."
"Yes."
"Yes, before others," replied the doctor; "but now we are "But how could a dose prepared for M. Noirtier poison
alone" -Madame de Saint-Meran?"
"What are you going to say? Oh, spare me!"
"That the symptoms of tetanus and poisoning by vegetable
substances are the same." M. de Villefort started from his
seat, then in a moment fell down again, silent and motionless.
Morrel knew not if he were dreaming or awake. "Listen, said
the doctor; "I know the full importance of the statement I
have just made, and the disposition of the man to whom I
have made it."
"Do you speak to me as a magistrate or as a friend?" asked
Villefort.
"As a friend, and only as a friend, at this moment. The
similarity in the symptoms of tetanus and poisoning by
vegetable substances is so great, that were I obliged to affirm
by oath what I have now stated, I should hesitate; I therefore
repeat to you, I speak not to a magistrate, but to a friend.
And to that friend I say. `During the three-quarters of an
hour that the struggle continued, I watched the convulsions
and the death of Madame de Saint-Meran, and am
302

"Nothing is more simple. You know poisons become
remedies in certain diseases, of which paralysis is one. For
instance, having tried every other remedy to restore
movement and speech to M. Noirtier, I resolved to try one
last means, and for three months I have been giving him
brucine; so that in the last dose I ordered for him there were
six grains. This quantity, which is perfectly safe to
administer to the paralyzed frame of M. Noirtier, which has
become gradually accustomed to it, would be sufficient to
kill another person."
"My dear doctor, there is no communication between M.
Noirtier's apartment and that of Madame de Saint-Meran,
and Barrois never entered my mother-in-law's room. In short,
doctor although I know you to be the most conscientious
man in the world, and although I place the utmost reliance
in you, I want, notwithstanding my conviction, to believe
this axiom, errare humanum est."
"Is there one of my brethren in whom you have equal

confidence with myself?"

transports of youth, he bounded from his hiding-place, and
with two strides, at the risk of being seen, at the risk of
"Why do you ask me that? -- what do you wish?"
alarming Valentine, at the risk of being discovered by some
"Send for him; I will tell him what I have seen, and we will exclamation which might escape the young girl, he crossed
consult together, and examine the body."
the flower-garden, which by the light of the moon resembled
a large white lake, and having passed the rows of
"And you will find traces of poison?"
orange-trees which extended in front of the house, he
"No, I did not say of poison, but we can prove what was the reached the step, ran quickly up and pushed the door, which
state of the body; we shall discover the cause of her sudden opened without offering any resistance. Valentine had not
death, and we shall say, `Dear Villefort, if this thing has been seen him. Her eyes, raised towards heaven, were watching a
caused by negligence, watch over your servants; if from silvery cloud gliding over the azure, its form that of a
hatred, watch your enemies.'"
shadow mounting towards heaven. Her poetic and excited
"What do you propose to me, d'Avrigny?" said Villefort in mind pictured it as the soul of her grandmother.
despair; "so soon as another is admitted into our secret, an Meanwhile, Morrel had traversed the anteroom and found
inquest will become necessary; and an inquest in my house -- the staircase, which, being carpeted, prevented his approach
impossible! Still," continued the procureur, looking at the being heard, and he had regained that degree of confidence
doctor with uneasiness, "if you wish it -- if you demand it, that the presence of M. de Villefort even would not have
why then it shall be done. But, doctor, you see me already so alarmed him. He was quite prepared for any such encounter.
grieved -- how can I introduce into my house so much He would at once approach Valentine's father and
scandal, after so much sorrow? My wife and my daughter acknowledge all, begging Villefort to pardon and sanction
would die of it! And I, doctor -- you know a man does not the love which united two fond and loving hearts. Morrel
arrive at the post I occupy -- one has not been king's attorney was mad. Happily he did not meet any one. Now, especially,
twenty-five years without having amassed a tolerable did he find the description Valentine had given of the
number of enemies; mine are numerous. Let this affair be interior of the house useful to him; he arrived safely at the
talked of, it will be a triumph for them, which will make top of the staircase, and while he was feeling his way, a sob
them rejoice, and cover me with shame. Pardon me, doctor, indicated the direction he was to take. He turned back, a
these worldly ideas; were you a priest I should not dare tell door partly open enabled him to see his road, and to hear the
you that, but you are a man, and you know mankind. Doctor, voice of one in sorrow. He pushed the door open and
pray recall your words; you have said nothing, have you?"
entered. At the other end of the room, under a white sheet
"My dear M. de Villefort," replied the doctor, "my first duty
is to humanity. I would have saved Madame de Saint-Meran,
if science could have done it; but she is dead and my duty
regards the living. Let us bury this terrible secret in the
deepest recesses of our hearts; I am willing, if any one
should suspect this, that my silence on the subject should be
imputed to my ignorance. Meanwhile, sir, watch always -watch carefully, for perhaps the evil may not stop here. And
when you have found the culprit, if you find him, I will say
to you, `You are a magistrate, do as you will!'"
"I thank you, doctor," said Villefort with indescribable joy; "I
never had a better friend than you." And, as if he feared
Doctor d'Avrigny would recall his promise, he hurried him
towards the house.
When they were gone, Morrel ventured out from under the
trees, and the moon shone upon his face, which was so pale
it might have been taken for that of a ghost. "I am manifestly
protected in a most wonderful, but most terrible manner,"
said he; "but Valentine, poor girl, how will she bear so much
sorrow?"
As he thought thus, he looked alternately at the window
with red curtains and the three windows with white curtains.
The light had almost disappeared from the former; doubtless
Madame de Villefort had just put out her lamp, and the
nightlamp alone reflected its dull light on the window. At
the extremity of the building, on the contrary, he saw one of
the three windows open. A wax-light placed on the
mantle-piece threw some of its pale rays without, and a
shadow was seen for one moment on the balcony. Morrel
shuddered; he thought he heard a sob.

which covered it, lay the corpse, still more alarming to
Morrel since the account he had so unexpectedly overheard.
By its side, on her knees, and with her head buried in the
cushion of an easy-chair, was Valentine, trembling and
sobbing, her hands extended above her head, clasped and
stiff. She had turned from the window, which remained
open, and was praying in accents that would have affected
the most unfeeling; her words were rapid, incoherent,
unintelligible, for the burning weight of grief almost stopped
her utterance. The moon shining through the open blinds
made the lamp appear to burn paler, and cast a sepulchral
hue over the whole scene. Morrel could not resist this; he
was not exemplary for piety, he was not easily impressed,
but Valentine suffering, weeping, wringing her hands before
him, was more than he could bear in silence. He sighed, and
whispered a name, and the head bathed in tears and pressed
on the velvet cushion of the chair -- a head like that of a
Magdalen by Correggio -- was raised and turned towards
him. Valentine perceived him without betraying the least
surprise. A heart overwhelmed with one great grief is
insensible to minor emotions. Morrel held out his hand to
her. Valentine, as her only apology for not having met him,
pointed to the corpse under the sheet, and began to sob
again. Neither dared for some time to speak in that room.
They hesitated to break the silence which death seemed to
impose; at length Valentine ventured.
"My friend," said she, "how came you here? Alas, I would
say you are welcome, had not death opened the way for you
into this house."

"Valentine," said Morrel with a trembling voice, "I had
waited since half-past eight, and did not see you come; I
It cannot be wondered at that his mind, generally so became uneasy, leaped the wall, found my way through the
courageous, but now disturbed by the two strongest human garden, when voices conversing about the fatal event" -passions, love and fear, was weakened even to the
"What voices?" asked Valentine. Morrel shuddered as he
indulgence of superstitious thoughts. Although it was
thought of the conversation of the doctor and M. de Villefort,
impossible that Valentine should see him, hidden as he was,
and he thought he could see through the sheet the extended
he thought he heard the shadow at the window call him; his
hands, the stiff neck, and the purple lips.
disturbed mind told him so. This double error became an
irresistible reality, and by one of the incomprehensible "Your servants," said he, "who were repeating the whole of
303


CHAPTER 73

the sorrowful story; from them I learned it all."
"But it was risking the failure of our plan to come up here,
love."
"Forgive me," replied Morrel; "I will go away."
"No," said Valentine, "you might meet some one; stay."
"But if any one should come here" -The young girl shook her head. "No one will come," said she;
"do not fear, there is our safeguard," pointing to the bed.
"But what has become of M. d'Epinay?" replied Morrel.

THE PROMISE
in the approach of the young girl which struck the old man,
and immediately his bright eye began to interrogate. "Dear
grandfather." said she hurriedly, "you know poor
grandmamma died an hour since, and now I have no friend
in the world but you." His expressive eyes evinced the
greatest tenderness. "To you alone, then, may I confide my
sorrows and my hopes?" The paralytic motioned "Yes."
Valentine took Maximilian's hand. "Look attentively, then, at
this gentleman." The old man fixed his scrutinizing gaze
with slight astonishment on Morrel. "It is M. Maximilian
Morrel," said she; "the son of that good merchant of
Marseilles, whom you doubtless recollect."

"M. Franz arrived to sign the contract just as my dear
"Yes," said the old man. "He brings an irreproachable name,
grandmother was dying."
which Maximilian is likely to render glorious, since at thirty
"Alas," said Morrel with a feeling of selfish joy; for he years of age he is a captain, an officer of the Legion of
thought this death would cause the wedding to be Honor." The old man signified that he recollected him. "Well,
postponed indefinitely. "But what redoubles my sorrow," grandpapa," said Valentine, kneeling before him, and
continued the young girl, as if this feeling was to receive its pointing to Maximilian, "I love him, and will be only his;
immediate punishment, "is that the poor old lady, on her were I compelled to marry another, I would destroy myself."
death-bed, requested that the marriage might take place as
The eyes of the paralytic expressed a multitude of
soon as possible; she also, thinking to protect me, was acting
tumultuous thoughts. "You like M. Maximilian Morrel, do
against me."
you not, grandpapa?" asked Valentine.
"Hark!" said Morrel. They both listened; steps were distinctly
"Yes."
heard in the corridor and on the stairs.
"And you will protect us, who are your children, against the
"It is my father, who has just left his study."
will of my father?" -- Noirtier cast an intelligent glance at
"To accompany the doctor to the door," added Morrel.
Morrel, as if to say, "perhaps I may." Maximilian understood
"How do you know it is the doctor?" asked Valentine, him.
astonished.
"I imagined it must be," said Morrel. Valentine looked at the
young man; they heard the street door close, then M. de
Villefort locked the garden door, and returned up-stairs. He
stopped a moment in the anteroom, as if hesitating whether
to turn to his own apartment or into Madame de
Saint-Meran's; Morrel concealed himself behind a door;
Valentine remained motionless, grief seeming to deprive her
of all fear. M. de Villefort passed on to his own room. "Now,"
said Valentine, "you can neither go out by the front door nor
by the garden." Morrel looked at her with astonishment.
"There is but one way left you that is safe," said she; "it is
through my grandfather's room." She rose, "Come," she
added. -- "Where?" asked Maximilian.
"To my grandfather's room."
"I in M. Noirtier's apartment?"
"Yes."
"Can you mean it, Valentine?"
"I have long wished it; he is my only remaining friend and
we both need his help, -- come."
"Be careful, Valentine," said Morrel, hesitating to comply
with the young girl's wishes; "I now see my error -- I acted
like a madman in coming in here. Are you sure you are more
reasonable?"

"Mademoiselle," said he, "you have a sacred duty to fulfil in
your deceased grandmother's room, will you allow me the
honor of a few minutes' conversation with M. Noirtier?"
"That is it," said the old man's eye. Then he looked anxiously
at Valentine.
"Do you fear he will not understand?"
"Yes."
"Oh, we have so often spoken of you, that he knows exactly
how I talk to you." Then turning to Maximilian, with an
adorable smile; although shaded by sorrow, -- "He knows
everything I know," said she.
Valentine arose, placed a chair for Morrel, requested Barrois
not to admit any one, and having tenderly embraced her
grandfather, and sorrowfully taken leave of Morrel, she
went away. To prove to Noirtier that he was in Valentine's
confidence and knew all their secrets, Morrel took the
dictionary, a pen, and some paper, and placed them all on a
table where there was a light.
"But first," said Morrel, "allow me, sir, to tell you who I am,
how much I love Mademoiselle Valentine, and what are my
designs respecting her." Noirtier made a sign that he would
listen.

It was an imposing sight to witness this old man, apparently
a mere useless burden, becoming the sole protector, support,
"Yes," said Valentine; "and I have but one scruple, -- that of and adviser of the lovers who were both young, beautiful,
leaving my dear grandmother's remains, which I had and strong. His remarkably noble and austere expression
struck Morrel, who began his story with trembling. He
undertaken to watch."
related the manner in which he had become acquainted with
"Valentine," said Morrel, "death is in itself sacred."
Valentine, and how he had loved her, and that Valentine, in
"Yes," said Valentine; "besides, it will not be for long." She her solitude and her misfortune, had accepted the offer of his
then crossed the corridor, and led the way down a narrow devotion. He told him his birth, his position, his fortune, and
staircase to M. Noirtier's room; Morrel followed her on tiptoe; more than once, when he consulted the look of the paralytic,
at the door they found the old servant. "Barrois," said that look answered, "That is good, proceed."
Valentine, "shut the door, and let no one come in." She "And now," said Morrel, when he had finished the first part
passed first. Noirtier, seated in his chair, and listening to of his recital, "now I have told you of my love and my hopes,
every sound, was watching the door; he saw Valentine, and may I inform you of my intentions?"
his eye brightened. There was something grave and solemn
"Yes," signified the old man.
304

"This was our resolution; a cabriolet was in waiting at the
gate, in which I intended to carry off Valentine to my sister's
house, to marry her, and to wait respectfully M. de Villefort's
pardon."
"No," said Noirtier.
"We must not do so?"
"No."
"You do not sanction our project?"
"No."
"There is another way," said Morrel. The old man's
interrogative eye said, "What?"
"I will go," continued Maximilian, "I will seek M. Franz
d'Epinay -- I am happy to be able to mention this in
Mademoiselle de Villefort's absence -- and will conduct
myself toward him so as to compel him to challenge me."
Noirtier's look continued to interrogate. "You wish to know
what I will do?"
"Yes."
"I will find him, as I told you. I will tell him the ties which
bind me to Mademoiselle Valentine; if he be a sensible man,
he will prove it by renouncing of his own accord the hand of
his betrothed, and will secure my friendship, and love until
death; if he refuse, either through interest or ridiculous pride,
after I have proved to him that he would be forcing my wife
from me, that Valentine loves me, and will have no other, I
will fight with him, give him every advantage, and I shall
kill him, or he will kill me; if I am victorious, he will not
marry Valentine, and if I die, I am very sure Valentine will
not marry him." Noirtier watched, with indescribable
pleasure, this noble and sincere countenance, on which every
sentiment his tongue uttered was depicted, adding by the
expression of his fine features all that coloring adds to a
sound and faithful drawing. Still, when Morrel had finished,
he shut his eyes several times, which was his manner of
saying "No."
"No?" said Morrel; "you disapprove of this second project, as
you did of the first?"
"I do," signified the old man.
"But what then must be done?" asked Morrel. "Madame de
Saint-Meran's last request was, that the marriage might not
be delayed; must I let things take their course?" Noirtier did
not move. "I understand," said Morrel; "I am to wait."

for my life depends on your answer. Will our help come
from you?"
"Yes."
"You are sure of it?"
"Yes." There was so much firmness in the look which gave
this answer, no one could, at any rate, doubt his will, if they
did his power. "Oh, thank you a thousand times! But how,
unless a miracle should restore your speech, your gesture,
your movement, how can you, chained to that arm-chair,
dumb and motionless, oppose this marriage?" A smile lit up
the old man's face, a strange smile of the eyes in a paralyzed
face. "Then I must wait?" asked the young man.
"Yes."
"But the contract?" The same smile returned. "Will you
assure me it shall not be signed?"
"Yes," said Noirtier.
"The contract shall not be signed!" cried Morrel. "Oh, pardon
me, sir; I can scarcely realize so great a happiness. Will they
not sign it?"
"No," said the paralytic. Notwithstanding that assurance,
Morrel still hesitated. This promise of an impotent old man
was so strange that, instead of being the result of the power
of his will, it might emanate from enfeebled organs. Is it not
natural that the madman, ignorant of his folly, should
attempt things beyond his power? The weak man talks of
burdens he can raise, the timid of giants he can confront, the
poor of treasures he spends, the most humble peasant, in the
height of his pride, calls himself Jupiter. Whether Noirtier
understood the young man's indecision, or whether he had
not full confidence in his docility, he looked uneasily at him.
"What do you wish, sir?" asked Morrel; "that I should renew
my promise of remaining tranquil?" Noirtier's eye remained
fixed and firm, as if to imply that a promise did not suffice;
then it passed from his face to his hands.
"Shall I swear to you, sir?" asked Maximilian.
"Yes?" said the paralytic with the same solemnity. Morrel
understood that the old man attached great importance to an
oath. He extended his hand.
"I swear to you, on my honor," said he, "to await your
decision respecting the course I am to pursue with M.
d'Epinay."
"That is right," said the old man.

"Yes."

"Now," said Morrel, "do you wish me to retire?"

"But delay may ruin our plan, sir," replied the young man.
"Alone, Valentine has no power; she will be compelled to
submit. I am here almost miraculously, and can scarcely
hope for so good an opportunity to occur again. Believe me,
there are only the two plans I have proposed to you; forgive
my vanity, and tell me which you prefer. Do you authorize
Mademoiselle Valentine to intrust herself to my honor?"

"Yes."

"No."
"Do you prefer I should seek M. d'Epinay?"
"No."
"Whence then will come the help we need -- from chance?"
resumed Morrel.
"No."
"From you?"
"Yes."
"You thoroughly understand me, sir? Pardon my eagerness,

"Without seeing Mademoiselle Valentine?"
"Yes."
Morrel made a sign that he was ready to obey. "But," said he,
"first allow me to embrace you as your daughter did just
now." Noirtier's expression could not be understood. The
young man pressed his lips on the same spot, on the old
man's forehead, where Valentine's had been. Then he bowed
a second time and retired. He found outside the door the old
servant, to whom Valentine had given directions. Morrel
was conducted along a dark passage, which led to a little
door opening on the garden, soon found the spot where he
had entered, with the assistance of the shrubs gained the top
of the wall, and by his ladder was in an instant in the
clover-field where his cabriolet was still waiting for him. He
got in it, and thoroughly wearied by so many emotions,
arrived about midnight in the Rue Meslay, threw himself on
his bed and slept soundly.
305


CHAPTER 74


Chapter 74

THE VILLEFORT FAMILY VAULT

The Villefort Family Vault

T

wo days after, a considerable crowd was assembled,
towards ten o'clock in the morning, around the door of
M. de Villefort's house, and a long file of mourning-coaches
and private carriages extended along the Faubourg
Saint-Honore and the Rue de la Pepiniere. Among them was
one of a very singular form, which appeared to have come
from a distance. It was a kind of covered wagon, painted
black, and was one of the first to arrive. Inquiry was made,
and it was ascertained that, by a strange coincidence, this
carriage contained the corpse of the Marquis de Saint-Meran,
and that those who had come thinking to attend one funeral
would follow two. Their number was great. The Marquis de
Saint-Meran, one of the most zealous and faithful dignitaries
of Louis XVIII. and King Charles X., had preserved a great
number of friends, and these, added to the personages
whom the usages of society gave Villefort a claim on, formed
a considerable body.
Due information was given to the authorities, and
permission obtained that the two funerals should take place
at the same time. A second hearse, decked with the same
funereal pomp, was brought to M. de Villefort's door, and
the coffin removed into it from the post-wagon. The two
bodies were to be interred in the cemetery of Pere-la-Chaise,
where M. de Villefort had long since had a tomb prepared
for the reception of his family. The remains of poor Renee
were already deposited there, and now, after ten years of
separation, her father and mother were to be reunited with
her. The Parisians, always curious, always affected by
funereal display, looked on with religious silence while the
splendid procession accompanied to their last abode two of
the number of the old aristocracy -- the greatest protectors of
commerce and sincere devotees to their principles. In one of
the
mourning-coaches
Beauchamp,
Debray,
and
Chateau-Renaud were talking of the very sudden death of
the marchioness. "I saw Madame de Saint-Meran only last
year at Marseilles, when I was coming back from Algiers,"
said Chateau-Renaud; "she looked like a woman destined to
live to be a hundred years old, from her apparent sound
health and great activity of mind and body. How old was
she?"

Jacobin, Noirtier."
"That is a tenacious old grandfather," said Beauchamp.
"Tenacem propositi virum. I think he must have made an
agreement with death to outlive all his heirs, and he appears
likely to succeed. He resembles the old Conventionalist of '93,
who said to Napoleon, in 1814, `You bend because your
empire is a young stem, weakened by rapid growth. Take
the Republic for a tutor; let us return with renewed strength
to the battle-field, and I promise you 500,000 soldiers,
another Marengo, and a second Austerlitz. Ideas do not
become extinct, sire; they slumber sometimes, but only
revive the stronger before they sleep entirely.' Ideas and men
appeared the same to him. One thing only puzzles me,
namely, how Franz d'Epinay will like a grandfather who
cannot be separated from his wife. But where is Franz?"
"In the first carriage, with M. de Villefort, who considers him
already as one of the family."
Such was the conversation in almost all the carriages; these
two sudden deaths, so quickly following each other,
astonished every one, but no one suspected the terrible
secret which M. d'Avrigny had communicated, in his
nocturnal walk to M. de Villefort. They arrived in about an
hour at the cemetery; the weather was mild, but dull, and in
harmony with the funeral ceremony. Among the groups
which flocked towards the family vault, Chateau-Renaud
recognized Morrel, who had come alone in a cabriolet, and
walked silently along the path bordered with yew-trees.
"You here?" said Chateau-Renaud, passing his arms through
the young captain's; "are you a friend of Villefort's? How is it
that I have never met you at his house?"
"I am no acquaintance of M. de Villefort's." answered Morrel,
"but I was of Madame de Saint-Meran." Albert came up to
them at this moment with Franz.

"The time and place are but ill-suited for an introduction."
said Albert; "but we are not superstitious. M. Morrel, allow
me to present to you M. Franz d'Epinay, a delightful
travelling companion, with whom I made the tour of Italy.
My dear Franz, M. Maximilian Morrel, an excellent friend I
have acquired in your absence, and whose name you will
"Franz assured me," replied Albert, "that she was sixty-six hear me mention every time I make any allusion to affection,
years old. But she has not died of old age, but of grief; it wit, or amiability." Morrel hesitated for a moment; he feared
appears that since the death of the marquis, which affected it would be hypocritical to accost in a friendly manner the
her very deeply, she has not completely recovered her man whom he was tacitly opposing, but his oath and the
reason."
gravity of the circumstances recurred to his memory; he
struggled to conceal his emotion and bowed to Franz.
"But of what disease, then, did she die?" asked Debray.
"Mademoiselle de Villefort is in deep sorrow, is she not?"
"It is said to have been a congestion of the brain, or apoplexy,
said Debray to Franz.
which is the same thing, is it not?"
"Extremely," replied he; "she looked so pale this morning, I
"Nearly."
scarcely knew her." These apparently simple words pierced
"It is difficult to believe that it was apoplexy," said Morrel to the heart. This man had seen Valentine, and
Beauchamp. "Madame de Saint-Meran, whom I once saw, spoken to her! The young and high-spirited officer required
was short, of slender form, and of a much more nervous than all his strength of mind to resist breaking his oath. He took
sanguine temperament; grief could hardly produce apoplexy the arm of Chateau-Renaud, and turned towards the vault,
in such a constitution as that of Madame de Saint-Meran."
where the attendants had already placed the two coffins.
"This is a magnificent habitation," said Beauchamp, looking
"At any rate," said Albert, "whatever disease or doctor may
towards the mausoleum; "a summer and winter palace. You
have killed her, M. de Villefort, or rather, Mademoiselle
will, in turn, enter it, my dear d'Epinay, for you will soon be
Valentine, -- or, still rather, our friend Franz, inherits a
numbered as one of the family. I, as a philosopher, should
magnificent fortune, amounting, I believe, to 80,000 livres
like a little country-house, a cottage down there under the
per annum."
trees, without so many free-stones over my poor body. In
"And this fortune will be doubled at the death of the old
306

dying, I will say to those around me what Voltaire wrote to Deschamps, Place Beauveau, Faubourg Saint-Honore, and
Piron: `Eo rus, and all will be over.' But come, Franz, take you have my authority to inspect those deeds."
courage, your wife is an heiress."
"Sir," replied M. d'Epinay, "it is not, perhaps, the moment for
"Indeed, Beauchamp, you are unbearable. Politics has made Mademoiselle Valentine, who is in deep distress, to think of
you laugh at everything, and political men have made you a husband; indeed, I fear" -disbelieve everything. But when you have the honor of
"Valentine will have no greater pleasure than that of
associating with ordinary men, and the pleasure of leaving
fulfilling her grandmother's last injunctions; there will be no
politics for a moment, try to find your affectionate heart,
obstacle from that quarter, I assure you."
which you leave with your stick when you go to the
"In that case," replied Franz, "as I shall raise none, you may
Chamber."
make arrangements when you please; I have pledged my
"But tell me," said Beauchamp, "what is life? Is it not a hall in
word, and shall feel pleasure and happiness in adhering to
Death's anteroom?"
it."
"I am prejudiced against Beauchamp," said Albert, drawing
"Then," said Villefort, "nothing further is required. The
Franz away, and leaving the former to finish his
contract was to have been signed three days since; we shall
philosophical dissertation with Debray. The Villefort vault
find it all ready, and can sign it to-day."
formed a square of white stones, about twenty feet high; an
interior partition separated the two families, and each "But the mourning?" said Franz, hesitating.
apartment had its entrance door. Here were not, as in other "Don't be uneasy on that score," replied Villefort; "no
tombs, ignoble drawers, one above another, where thrift ceremony will be neglected in my house. Mademoiselle de
bestows its dead and labels them like specimens in a Villefort may retire during the prescribed three months to
museum; all that was visible within the bronze gates was a her estate of Saint-Meran; I say hers, for she inherits it to-day.
gloomy-looking room, separated by a wall from the vault There, after a few days, if you like, the civil marriage shall be
itself. The two doors before mentioned were in the middle of celebrated without pomp or ceremony. Madame de
this wall, and enclosed the Villefort and Saint-Meran coffins. Saint-Meran wished her daughter should be married there.
There grief might freely expend itself without being When that in over, you, sir, can return to Paris, while your
disturbed by the trifling loungers who came from a picnic wife passes the time of her mourning with her
party to visit Pere-la-Chaise, or by lovers who make it their mother-in-law."
rendezvous.
"As you please, sir," said Franz.
The two coffins were placed on trestles previously prepared
for their reception in the right-hand crypt belonging to the "Then," replied M. de Villefort, "have the kindness to wait
Saint-Meran family. Villefort, Franz, and a few near relatives half an hour; Valentine shall come down into the
drawing-room. I will send for M. Deschamps; we will read
alone entered the sanctuary.
and sign the contract before we separate, and this evening
As the religious ceremonies had all been performed at the Madame de Villefort; shall accompany Valentine to her
door, and there was no address given, the party all separated; estate, where we will rejoin them in a week."
Chateau-Renaud, Albert, and Morrel, went one way, and
Debray and Beauchamp the other. Franz remained with M. "Sir," said Franz, "I have one request to make."
de Villefort; at the gate of the cemetery Morrel made an "What is it?"
excuse to wait; he saw Franz and M. de Villefort get into the
"I wish Albert de Morcerf and Raoul de Chateau-Renaud to
same mourning coach, and thought this meeting forboded
be present at this signature; you know they are my
evil. He then returned to Paris, and although in the same
witnesses."
carriage with Chateau-Renaud and Albert, he did not hear
one word of their conversation. As Franz was about to take "Half an hour will suffice to apprise them; will you go for
leave of M. de Villefort, "When shall I see you again?" said them yourself, or shall you send?"
the latter.
"I prefer going, sir."
"At what time you please, sir," replied Franz.
"As soon as possible."
"I am at your command, sir; shall we return together?"
"If not unpleasant to you."
"On the contrary, I shall feel much pleasure." Thus, the
future father and son-in-law stepped into the same carriage,
and Morrel, seeing them pass, became uneasy. Villefort and
Franz returned to the Faubourg Saint-Honore. The procureur,
without going to see either his wife or his daughter, went at
once to his study, and, offering the young man a chair, -- "M.
d'Epinay," said he, "allow me to remind you at this moment,
-- which is perhaps not so ill-chosen as at first sight may
appear, for obedience to the wishes of the departed is the
first offering which should be made at their tomb, -- allow
me then to remind you of the wish expressed by Madame de
Saint-Meran on her death-bed, that Valentine's wedding
might not be deferred. You know the affairs of the deceased
are in perfect order, and her will bequeaths to Valentine the
entire property of the Saint-Meran family; the notary showed
me the documents yesterday, which will enable us to draw
up the contract immediately. You may call on the notary, M.

"I shall expect you, then, in half an hour, baron, and
Valentine will be ready." Franz bowed and left the room.
Scarcely had the door closed, when M. de Villefort sent to
tell Valentine to be ready in the drawing-room in half an
hour, as he expected the notary and M. d'Epinay and his
witnesses. The news caused a great sensation throughout the
house; Madame de Villefort would not believe it, and
Valentine was thunderstruck. She looked around for help,
and would have gone down to her grandfather's room, but
on the stairs she met M. de Villefort, who took her arm and
led her into the drawing-room. In the anteroom, Valentine
met Barrois, and looked despairingly at the old servant. A
moment later, Madame de Villefort entered the
drawing-room with her little Edward. It was evident that she
had shared the grief of the family, for she was pale and
looked fatigued. She sat down, took Edward on her knees,
and from time to time pressed this child, on whom her
affections appeared centred, almost convulsively to her
bosom. Two carriages were soon heard to enter the court
yard. One was the notary's; the other, that of Franz and his
friends. In a moment the whole party was assembled.
Valentine was so pale one might trace the blue veins from
her temples, round her eyes and down her cheeks. Franz
307


CHAPTER 74


THE VILLEFORT FAMILY VAULT

was deeply affected. Chateau-Renaud and Albert looked at
each other with amazement; the ceremony which was just
concluded had not appeared more sorrowful than did that
which was about to begin. Madame de Villefort had placed
herself in the shadow behind a velvet curtain, and as she
constantly bent over her child, it was difficult to read the
expression of her face. M. de Villefort was, as usual,
unmoved.
The notary, after having according to the customary method
arranged the papers on the table, taken his place in an
armchair, and raised his spectacles, turned towards Franz:
"Are you M. Franz de Quesnel, baron d'Epinay?" asked he,
although he knew it perfectly.
"Yes, sir," replied Franz. The notary bowed. "I have, then, to
inform you, sir, at the request of M. de Villefort, that your
projected marriage with Mademoiselle de Villefort has
changed the feeling of M. Noirtier towards his grandchild,
and that he disinherits her entirely of the fortune he would
have left her. Let me hasten to add," continued he, "that the
testator, having only the right to alienate a part of his fortune,
and having alienated it all, the will will not bear scrutiny,
and is declared null and void."
"Yes." said Villefort; "but I warn M. d'Epinay, that during my
life-time my father's will shall never be questioned, my
position forbidding any doubt to be entertained."
"Sir," said Franz, "I regret much that such a question has
been raised in the presence of Mademoiselle Valentine; I
have never inquired the amount of her fortune, which,
however limited it may be, exceeds mine. My family has
sought consideration in this alliance with M. de Villefort; all
I seek is happiness." Valentine imperceptibly thanked him,
while two silent tears rolled down her cheeks. "Besides, sir,"
said Villefort, addressing himself to his future son-in-law,
"excepting the loss of a portion of your hopes, this
unexpected will need not personally wound you; M.
Noirtier's weakness of mind sufficiently explains it. It is not
because Mademoiselle Valentine is going to marry you that
he is angry, but because she will marry, a union with any
other would have caused him the same sorrow. Old age is
selfish, sir, and Mademoiselle de Villefort has been a faithful
companion to M. Noirtier, which she cannot be when she
becomes the Baroness d'Epinay. My father's melancholy
state prevents our speaking to him on any subjects, which
the weakness of his mind would incapacitate him from
understanding, and I am perfectly convinced that at the
present time, although, he knows that his granddaughter is
going to be married, M. Noirtier has even forgotten the name

308

of his intended grandson." M. de Villefort had scarcely said
this, when the door opened, and Barrois appeared.
"Gentlemen," said he, in a tone strangely firm for a servant
speaking to his masters under such solemn circumstances, -"gentlemen, M. Noirtier de Villefort wishes to speak
immediately to M. Franz de Quesnel, baron d'Epinay;" he, as
well as the notary, that there might be no mistake in the
person, gave all his titles to the bride-groom elect.
Villefort started, Madame de Villefort let her son slip from
her knees, Valentine rose, pale and dumb as a statue. Albert
and Chateau-Renaud exchanged a second look, more full of
amazement than the first. The notary looked at Villefort. "It
is impossible," said the procureur. "M. d'Epinay cannot leave
the drawing-room at present."
"It is at this moment," replied Barrois with the same firmness,
"that M. Noirtier, my master, wishes to speak on important
subjects to M. Franz d'Epinay."
"Grandpapa Noirtier can speak now, then," said Edward,
with his habitual quickness. However, his remark did not
make Madame de Villefort even smile, so much was every
mind engaged, and so solemn was the situation.
Astonishment was at its height. Something like a smile was
perceptible on Madame de Villefort's countenance. Valentine
instinctively raised her eyes, as if to thank heaven.
"Pray go, Valentine," said; M. de Villefort, "and see what this
new fancy of your grandfather's is." Valentine rose quickly,
and was hastening joyfully towards the door, when M. de
Villefort altered his intention.
"Stop," said he; "I will go with you."
"Excuse me, sir," said Franz, "since M. Noirtier sent for me, I
am ready to attend to his wish; besides, I shall be happy to
pay my respects to him, not having yet had the honor of
doing so."
"Pray, sir," said Villefort with marked uneasiness, "do not
disturb yourself."
"Forgive me, sir," said Franz in a resolute tone. "I would not
lose this opportunity of proving to M. Noirtier how wrong it
would be of him to encourage feelings of dislike to me,
which I am determined to conquer, whatever they may be,
by my devotion." And without listening to Villefort he arose,
and followed Valentine, who was running down-stairs with
the joy of a shipwrecked mariner who finds a rock to cling to.
M. de Villefort followed them. Chateau-Renaud and Morcerf
exchanged a third look of still increasing wonder.


Chapter 75

A Signed Statement

N

oirtier was prepared to receive them, dressed in black, string.
and installed in his arm-chair. When the three persons
"Is that what you wish for?" said Barrois.
he expected had entered, he looked at the door, which his
"Yes."
valet immediately closed.
"Listen," whispered Villefort to Valentine, who could not
conceal her joy; "if M. Noirtier wishes to communicate
anything which would delay your marriage, I forbid you to
understand him." Valentine blushed, but did not answer.
Villefort, approaching Noirtier -- "Here is M. Franz
d'Epinay," said he; "you requested to see him. We have all
wished for this interview, and I trust it will convince you
how ill-formed are your objections to Valentine's marriage."

"Shall I give these papers to M. de Villefort?"

Noirtier answered only by a look which made Villefort's
blood run cold. He motioned to Valentine to approach. In a
moment, thanks to her habit of conversing with her
grandfather, she understood that he asked for a key. Then
his eye was fixed on the drawer of a small chest between the
windows. She opened the drawer, and found a key; and,
understanding that was what he wanted, again watched his
eyes, which turned toward an old secretary which had been
neglected for many years and was supposed to contain
nothing but useless documents. "Shall I open the secretary?"
asked Valentine.

Franz, astonished, advanced a step. "To me, sir?" said he.

"Yes," said the old man.
"And the drawers?"
"Yes."
"Those at the side?"
"No."
"The middle one?"
"Yes." Valentine opened it and drew out a bundle of papers.
"Is that what you wish for?" asked she.
"No."

"No."
"To Mademoiselle Valentine?"
"No."
"To M. Franz d'Epinay?"
"Yes."
"Yes." Franz took them from Barrois and casting a glance at
the cover, read: -"`To be given, after my death, to General Durand, who shall
bequeath the packet to his son, with an injunction to
preserve it as containing an important document.'
"Well, sir," asked Franz, "what do you wish me to do with
this paper?"
"To preserve it, sealed up as it is, doubtless," said the
procureur.
"No," replied Noirtier eagerly.
"Do you wish him to read it?" said Valentine.
"Yes," replied the old man. "You understand, baron, my
grandfather wishes you to read this paper," said Valentine.
"Then let us sit down," said Villefort impatiently, "for it will
take some time."
"Sit down," said the old man. Villefort took a chair, but
Valentine remained standing by her father's side, and Franz
before him, holding the mysterious paper in his hand.
"Read," said the old man. Franz untied it, and in the midst of
the most profound silence read:

She took successively all the other papers out till the drawer
was empty. "But there are no more," said she. Noirtier's eye "`Extract from the Report of a meeting of the Bonapartist
was fixed on the dictionary. "Yes, I understand, Club in the Rue Saint-Jacques, held February 5th, 1815.'"
grandfather," said the young girl.
Franz stopped. "February 5th, 1815!" said he; "it is the day
"He pointed to each letter of the alphabet. At the letter S the my father was murdered." Valentine and Villefort were
old man stopped her. She opened, and found the word dumb; the eye of the old man alone seemed to say clearly,
"secret."
"Go on."
"Ah, is there a secret spring?" said Valentine.
"But it was on leaving this club," said he, "my father
"Yes," said Noirtier.
"And who knows it?" Noirtier looked at the door where the
servant had gone out. "Barrois?" said she.

disappeared." Noirtier's eye continued to say, "Read." He
resumed: --

"`The
undersigned
Louis
Jacques
Beaurepaire,
lieutenant-colonel of artillery, Etienne Duchampy, general of
"Yes."
brigade, and Claude Lecharpal, keeper of woods and forests,
"Shall I call him?"
Declare, that on the 4th of February, a letter arrived from the
Island of Elba, recommending to the kindness and the
"Yes."
confidence of the Bonapartist Club, General Flavien de
Valentine went to the door, and called Barrois. Villefort's Quesnel, who having served the emperor from 1804 to 1814
impatience during this scene made the perspiration roll from was supposed to be devoted to the interests of the Napoleon
his forehead, and Franz was stupefied. The old servant came. dynasty, notwithstanding the title of baron which Louis
"Barrois," said Valentine, "my grandfather has told me to XVIII. had just granted to him with his estate of Epinay.
open that drawer in the secretary, but there is a secret spring
"`A note was in consequence addressed to General de
in it, which you know -- will you open it?"
Quesnel, begging him to be present at the meeting next day,
Barrois looked at the old man. "Obey," said Noirtier's the 5th. The note indicated neither the street nor the number
intelligent eye. Barrois touched a spring, the false bottom of the house where the meeting was to be held; it bore no
came out, and they saw a bundle of papers tied with a black
309


CHAPTER 75


A SIGNED STATEMENT

signature, but it announced to the general that some one
would call for him if he would be ready at nine o'clock. The
meetings were always held from that time till midnight. At
nine o'clock the president of the club presented himself; the
general was ready, the president informed him that one of
the conditions of his introduction was that he should be
eternally ignorant of the place of meeting, and that he would
allow his eyes to be bandaged, swearing that he would not
endeavor to take off the bandage. General de Quesnel
accepted the condition, and promised on his honor not to
seek to discover the road they took. The general's carriage
was ready, but the president told him it was impossible for
him to use it, since it was useless to blindfold the master if
the coachman knew through what streets he went. "What
must be done then?" asked the general. -- "I have my carriage
here," said the president.

silent, with knitted brows.

"`"The deliberations had already begun. The members,
apprised of the sort of presentation which was to be made
that evening, were all in attendance. When in the middle of
the room the general was invited to remove his bandage, he
did so immediately, and was surprised to see so many
well-known faces in a society of whose existence he had till
then been ignorant. They questioned him as to his
sentiments, but he contented himself with answering, that
the letters from the Island of Elba ought to have informed
them'" --

"`"Sir," said the president, "you have been invited to join this
assembly -- you were not forced here; it was proposed to you
to come blindfolded -- you accepted. When you complied
with this twofold request you well knew we did not wish to
secure the throne of Louis XVIII., or we should not take so
much care to avoid the vigilance of the police. It would be
conceding too much to allow you to put on a mask to aid
you in the discovery of our secret, and then to remove it that
you may ruin those who have confided in you. No, no, you
must first say if you declare yourself for the king of a day
who now reigns, or for his majesty the emperor."

"`"Well," asked the president, "what do you say to this letter,
general?"
"`"I say that it is too soon after declaring myself for Louis
XVIII. to break my vow in behalf of the ex-emperor." This
answer was too clear to permit of any mistake as to his
sentiments. "General," said the president, "we acknowledge
no King Louis XVIII., or an ex-emperor, but his majesty the
emperor and king, driven from France, which is his kingdom,
by violence and treason."
"`"Excuse me, gentlemen," said the general; "you may not
acknowledge Louis XVIII., but I do, as he has made me a
baron and a field-marshal, and I shall never forget that for
these two titles I am indebted to his happy return to France."

"`"Sir," said the president, rising with gravity, "be careful
"`"Have you, then, so much confidence in your servant that what you say; your words clearly show us that they are
you can intrust him with a secret you will not allow me to deceived concerning you in the Island of Elba, and have
know?"
deceived us! The communication has been made to you in
"`"Our coachman is a member of the club," said the president; consequence of the confidence placed in you, and which
does you honor. Now we discover our error; a title and
"we shall be driven by a State-Councillor."
promotion attach you to the government we wish to
"`"Then we run another risk," said the general, laughing,
overturn. We will not constrain you to help us; we enroll no
"that of being upset." We insert this joke to prove that the
one against his conscience, but we will compel you to act
general was not in the least compelled to attend the meeting,
generously, even if you are not disposed to do so."
but that he came willingly. When they were seated in the
carriage the president reminded the general of his promise to "`"You would call acting generously, knowing your
allow his eyes to be bandaged, to which he made no conspiracy and not informing against you, that is what I
opposition. On the road the president thought he saw the should call becoming your accomplice. You see I am more
general make an attempt to remove the handkerchief, and candid than you."'"
reminded him of his oath. "Sure enough," said the general. "Ah, my father!" said Franz, interrupting himself. "I
The carriage stopped at an alley leading out of the Rue understand now why they murdered him." Valentine could
Saint-Jacques. The general alighted, leaning on the arm of not help casting one glance towards the young man, whose
the president, of whose dignity he was not aware, filial enthusiasm it was delightful to behold. Villefort walked
considering him simply as a member of the club; they went to and fro behind them. Noirtier watched the expression of
through the alley, mounted a flight of stairs, and entered the each one, and preserved his dignified and commanding
assembly-room.
attitude. Franz returned to the manuscript, and continued: --

Franz interrupted himself by saying, "My father was a
royalist; they need not have asked his sentiments, which "`"I am a royalist," replied the general; "I have taken the oath
were well known."
of allegiance to Louis XVIII., and I will adhere to it." These
"And hence," said Villefort, "arose my affection for your words were followed by a general murmur, and it was
father, my dear M. Franz. Opinions held in common are a evident that several of the members were discussing the
propriety of making the general repent of his rashness.
ready bond of union."
"`The president again arose, and having imposed silence,
said, -- "Sir, you are too serious and too sensible a man not to
"`The president then sought to make him speak more
understand the consequences of our present situation, and
explicitly, but M. de Quesnel replied that he wished first to
your candor has already dictated to us the conditions which
know what they wanted with him. He was then informed of
remain for us to offer you." The general, putting his hand on
the contents of the letter from the Island of Elba, in which he
his sword, exclaimed, -- "If you talk of honor, do not begin
was recommended to the club as a man who would be likely
by disavowing its laws, and impose nothing by violence."
to advance the interests of their party. One paragraph spoke
of the return of Bonaparte and promised another letter and "`"And you, sir," continued the president, with a calmness
further details, on the arrival of the Pharaon belonging to the still more terrible than the general's anger, "I advise you not
shipbuilder Morrel, of Marseilles, whose captain was to touch your sword." The general looked around him with
entirely devoted to the emperor. During all this time, the slight uneasiness; however he did not yield, but calling up
general, on whom they thought to have relied as on a all his fortitude, said, -- "I will not swear."
brother, manifested evidently signs of discontent and "`"Then you must die," replied the president calmly. M.
repugnance. When the reading was finished, he remained d'Epinay became very pale; he looked round him a second
"Read again," said the old man. Franz continued: --

310

time, several members of the club were whispering, and
getting their arms from under their cloaks. "General," said
the president, "do not alarm yourself; you are among men of
honor who will use every means to convince you before
resorting to the last extremity, but as you have said, you are
among conspirators, you are in possession of our secret, and
you must restore it to us." A significant silence followed
these words, and as the general did not reply, -- "Close the
doors," said the president to the door-keeper.
"`The same deadly silence succeeded these words. Then the
general advanced, and making a violent effort to control his
feelings, -- "I have a son," said he, "and I ought to think of
him, finding myself among assassins."
"`"General," said the chief of the assembly, "one man may
insult fifty -- it is the privilege of weakness. But he does
wrong to use his privilege. Follow my advice, swear, and do
not insult." The general, again daunted by the superiority of
the chief, hesitated a moment; then advancing to the
president's desk, -- "What is the form, said he.
"`"It is this: -- `I swear by my honor not to reveal to any one
what I have seen and heard on the 5th of February, 1815,
between nine and ten o'clock in the evening; and I plead
guilty of death should I ever violate this oath.'" The general
appeared to be affected by a nervous tremor, which
prevented his answering for some moments; then,
overcoming his manifest repugnance, he pronounced the
required oath, but in so low a tone as to be scarcely audible
to the majority of the members, who insisted on his
repeating it clearly and distinctly, which he did.
"`"Now am I at liberty to retire?" said the general. The
president rose, appointed three members to accompany him,
and got into the carriage with the general after bandaging
his eyes. One of those three members was the coachman who
had driven them there. The other members silently dispersed.
"Where do you wish to be taken?" asked the president. -"Anywhere out of your presence," replied M. d'Epinay.
"Beware, sir," replied the president, "you are no longer in the
assembly, and have only to do with individuals; do not
insult them unless you wish to be held responsible." But
instead of listening, M. d'Epinay went on, -- "You are still as
brave in your carriage as in your assembly because you are
still four against one." The president stopped the coach. They
were at that part of the Quai des Ormes where the steps lead
down to the river. "Why do you stop here?" asked d'Epinay.
"`"Because, sir," said the president, "you have insulted a man,
and that man will not go one step farther without
demanding honorable reparation."

mercury had been five or six degrees below freezing and the
steps were covered with ice. The general was stout and tall,
the president offered him the side of the railing to assist him
in getting down. The two witnesses followed. It was a dark
night. The ground from the steps to the river was covered
with snow and hoarfrost, the water of the river looked black
and deep. One of the seconds went for a lantern in a
coal-barge near, and by its light they examined the weapons.
The president's sword, which was simply, as he had said,
one he carried in his cane, was five inches shorter than the
general's, and had no guard. The general proposed to cast
lots for the swords, but the president said it was he who had
given the provocation, and when he had given it he had
supposed each would use his own arms. The witnesses
endeavored to insist, but the president bade them be silent.
The lantern was placed on the ground, the two adversaries
took their stations, and the duel began. The light made the
two swords appear like flashes of lightning; as for the men,
they were scarcely perceptible, the darkness was so great.
"`General d'Epinay passed for one of the best swordsmen in
the army, but he was pressed so closely in the onset that he
missed his aim and fell. The witnesses thought he was dead,
but his adversary, who knew he had not struck him, offered
him the assistance of his hand to rise. The circumstance
irritated instead of calming the general, and he rushed on his
adversary. But his opponent did not allow his guard to be
broken. He received him on his sword and three times the
general drew back on finding himself too closely engaged,
and then returned to the charge. At the third he fell again.
They thought he slipped, as at first, and the witnesses, seeing
he did not move, approached and endeavored to raise him,
but the one who passed his arm around the body found it
was moistened with blood. The general, who had almost
fainted, revived. "Ah," said he, "they have sent some
fencing-master to fight with me." The president, without
answering, approached the witness who held the lantern,
and raising his sleeve, showed him two wounds he had
received in his arm; then opening his coat, and unbuttoning
his waistcoat, displayed his side, pierced with a third wound.
Still he had not even uttered a sigh. General d'Epinay died
five minutes after.'"
Franz read these last words in a voice so choked that they
were hardly audible, and then stopped, passing his hand
over his eyes as if to dispel a cloud; but after a moment's
silence, he continued: --

"`The president went up the steps, after pushing his sword
into his cane; a track of blood on the snow marked his course.
He had scarcely arrived at the top when he heard a heavy
"`"Another method of assassination?" said the general, splash in the water -- it was the general's body, which the
witnesses had just thrown into the river after ascertaining
shrugging his shoulders.
that he was dead. The general fell, then, in a loyal duel, and
"`"Make no noise, sir, unless you wish me to consider you as not in ambush as it might have been reported. In proof of
one of the men of whom you spoke just now as cowards, this we have signed this paper to establish the truth of the
who take their weakness for a shield. You are alone, one facts, lest the moment should arrive when either of the actors
alone shall answer you; you have a sword by your side, I in this terrible scene should be accused of premeditated
have one in my cane; you have no witness, one of these murder or of infringement of the laws of honor.
gentlemen will serve you. Now, if you please, remove your
bandage." The general tore the handkerchief from his eyes. "`Signed, Beaurepaire, Deschamps, and Lecharpal.'"
"At last," said he, "I shall know with whom I have to do." When Franz had finished reading this account, so dreadful
They opened the door and the four men alighted.'"
for a son; when Valentine, pale with emotion, had wiped
Franz again interrupted himself, and wiped the cold drops away a tear; when Villefort, trembling, and crouched in a
from his brow; there was something awful in hearing the son corner, had endeavored to lessen the storm by supplicating
read aloud in trembling pallor these details of his father's glances at the implacable old man, -- "Sir," said d'Epinay to
death, which had hitherto been a mystery. Valentine clasped Noirtier, "since you are well acquainted with all these details,
her hands as if in prayer. Noirtier looked at Villefort with an which are attested by honorable signatures, -- since you
almost sublime expression of contempt and pride. Franz appear to take some interest in me, although you have only
manifested it hitherto by causing me sorrow, refuse me not
continued: -one final satisfaction -- tell me the name of the president of
"`It was, as we said, the fifth of February. For three days the
311


CHAPTER 75


A SIGNED STATEMENT

the club, that I may at least know who killed my father."
Villefort mechanically felt for the handle of the door;
Valentine, who understood sooner than anyone her
grandfather's answer, and who had often seen two scars
upon his right arm, drew back a few steps. "Mademoiselle,"
said Franz, turning towards Valentine, "unite your efforts
with mine to find out the name of the man who made me an
orphan at two years of age." Valentine remained dumb and
motionless.

"Yes," replied Noirtier.

"Oh, misery," cried Franz: "the only hope which sustained
me and enabled me to read to the end was that of knowing,
at least, the name of him who killed my father! Sir, sir," cried
he, turning to Noirtier, "do what you can -- make me
understand in some way!"

Noirtier -- you killed my father?"

"Oh, mademoiselle, -- mademoiselle!" cried Franz, "your
grandfather says he can indicate the person. Help me, -- lend
me your assistance!" Noirtier looked at the dictionary. Franz
took it with a nervous trembling, and repeated the letters of
the alphabet successively, until he came to M. At that letter
the old man signified "Yes."

"M," repeated Franz. The young man's finger, glided over the
words, but at each one Noirtier answered by a negative sign.
"Hold, sir," said Villefort, "do not prolong this dreadful scene.
Valentine hid her head between her hands. At length, Franz
The names have been purposely concealed; my father
arrived at the word MYSELF.
himself does not know who this president was, and if he
knows, he cannot tell you; proper names are not in the "Yes!"
dictionary."
"You?" cried Franz, whose hair stood on end; "you, M.

312

"Yes!" replied Noirtier, fixing a majestic look on the young
man. Franz fell powerless on a chair; Villefort opened the
door and escaped, for the idea had entered his mind to stifle
the little remaining life in the heart of this terrible old man.


Chapter 76

Progress Of Cavalcanti The Younger

M

eanwhile M. Cavalcanti the elder had returned to his
service, not in the army of his majesty the Emperor of
Austria, but at the gaming-table of the baths of Lucca, of
which he was one of the most assiduous courtiers. He had
spent every farthing that had been allowed for his journey as
a reward for the majestic and solemn manner in which he
had maintained his assumed character of father. M. Andrea
at his departure inherited all the papers which proved that
he had indeed the honor of being the son of the Marquis
Bartolomeo and the Marchioness Oliva Corsinari. He was
now fairly launched in that Parisian society which gives such
ready access to foreigners, and treats them, not as they really
are, but as they wish to be considered. Besides, what is
required of a young man in Paris? To speak its language
tolerably, to make a good appearance, to be a good gamester,
and to pay in cash. They are certainly less particular with a
foreigner than with a Frenchman. Andrea had, then, in a
fortnight, attained a very fair position. He was called count,
he was said to possess 50,000 livres per annum; and his
father's immense riches, buried in the quarries of Saravezza,
were a constant theme. A learned man, before whom the last
circumstance was mentioned as a fact, declared he had seen
the quarries in question, which gave great weight to
assertions hitherto somewhat doubtful, but which now
assumed the garb of reality.
Such was the state of society in Paris at the period we bring
before our readers, when Monte Cristo went one evening to
pay M. Danglars a visit. M. Danglars was out, but the count
was asked to go and see the baroness, and he accepted the
invitation. It was never without a nervous shudder, since the
dinner at Auteuil, and the events which followed it, that
Madame Danglars heard Monte Cristo's name announced. If
he did not come, the painful sensation became most intense;
if, on the contrary, he appeared, his noble countenance, his
brilliant eyes, his amiability, his polite attention even
towards Madame Danglars, soon dispelled every impression
of fear. It appeared impossible to the baroness that a man of
such delightfully pleasing manners should entertain evil
designs against her; besides, the most corrupt minds only
suspect evil when it would answer some interested end -useless injury is repugnant to every mind. When Monte
Cristo entered the boudoir, -- to which we have already once
introduced our readers, and where the baroness was
examining some drawings, which her daughter passed to
her after having looked at them with M. Cavalcanti, -- his
presence soon produced its usual effect, and it was with
smiles that the baroness received the count, although she
had been a little disconcerted at the announcement of his
name. The latter took in the whole scene at a glance.

philosophers assert protected sometimes the breast of
Sappho. Eugenie bowed coldly to the count, and availed
herself of the first moment when the conversation became
earnest to escape to her study, whence very soon two
cheerful and noisy voices being heard in connection with
occasional notes of the piano assured Monte Cristo that
Mademoiselle Danglars preferred to his society and to that
of M. Cavalcanti the company of Mademoiselle Louise
d'Armilly, her singing teacher.
It was then, especially while conversing with Madame
Danglars, and apparently absorbed by the charm of the
conversation, that the count noticed M. Andrea Cavalcanti's
solicitude, his manner of listening to the music at the door he
dared not pass, and of manifesting his admiration. The
banker soon returned. His first look was certainly directed
towards Monte Cristo, but the second was for Andrea. As for
his wife, he bowed to her, as some husbands do to their
wives, but in a way that bachelors will never comprehend,
until a very extensive code is published on conjugal life.
"Have not the ladies invited you to join them at the piano?"
said Danglars to Andrea. "Alas, no, sir," replied Andrea with
a sigh, still more remarkable than the former ones. Danglars
immediately advanced towards the door and opened it.
The two young ladies were seen seated on the same chair, at
the piano, accompanying themselves, each with one hand, a
fancy to which they had accustomed themselves, and
performed admirably. Mademoiselle d'Armilly, whom they
then perceived through the open doorway, formed with
Eugenie one of the tableaux vivants of which the Germans
are so fond. She was somewhat beautiful, and exquisitely
formed -- a little fairy-like figure, with large curls falling on
her neck, which was rather too long, as Perugino sometimes
makes his Virgins, and her eyes dull from fatigue. She was
said to have a weak chest, and like Antonia in the "Cremona
Violin," she would die one day while singing. Monte Cristo
cast one rapid and curious glance round this sanctum; it was
the first time he had ever seen Mademoiselle d'Armilly, of
whom he had heard much. "Well," said the banker to his
daughter, "are we then all to be excluded?" He then led the
young man into the study, and either by chance or
manoeuvre the door was partially closed after Andrea, so
that from the place where they sat neither the Count nor the
baroness could see anything; but as the banker had
accompanied Andrea, Madame Danglars appeared to take
no notice of it.

The count soon heard Andrea's voice, singing a Corsican
song, accompanied by the piano. While the count smiled at
hearing this song, which made him lose sight of Andrea in
The baroness was partially reclining on a sofa, Eugenie sat the recollection of Benedetto, Madame Danglars was
near her, and Cavalcanti was standing. Cavalcanti, dressed boasting to Monte Cristo of her husband's strength of mind,
in black, like one of Goethe's heroes, with varnished shoes who that very morning had lost three or four hundred
and white silk open-worked stockings, passed a white and thousand francs by a failure at Milan. The praise was well
tolerably nice-looking hand through his light hair, and so deserved, for had not the count heard it from the baroness,
displayed a sparkling diamond, that in spite of Monte or by one of those means by which he knew everything, the
Cristo's advice the vain young man had been unable to resist baron's countenance would not have led him to suspect it.
putting on his little finger. This movement was accompanied "Hem," thought Monte Cristo, "he begins to conceal his
by killing glances at Mademoiselle Danglars, and by sighs losses; a month since he boasted of them." Then aloud, -- "Oh,
launched in the same direction. Mademoiselle Danglars was madame, M. Danglars is so skilful, he will soon regain at the
still the same -- cold, beautiful, and satirical. Not one of these Bourse what he loses elsewhere."
glances, nor one sigh, was lost on her; they might have been "I see that you participate in a prevalent error," said Madame
said to fall on the shield of Minerva, which some
313


CHAPTER 76


PROGRESS OF CAVALCANTI THE YOUNGER

Danglars. "What is it?" said Monte Cristo.
"That M. Danglars speculates, whereas he never does."

find M. Cavalcanti in that room, where he, the betrothed of
Eugenie, has never been admitted."

"You may well say, perchance," replied the banker; "for he
"Truly, madame, I recollect M. Debray told me -- apropos,
comes so seldom, it would seem only chance that brings
what is become of him? I have seen nothing of him the last
him."
three or four days."
"But should he come and find that young man with your
"Nor I," said Madame Danglars; "but you began a sentence,
daughter, he might be displeased."
sir, and did not finish."
"He? You are mistaken. M. Albert would not do us the honor
"Which?"
to be jealous; he does not like Eugenie sufficiently. Besides, I
"M. Debray had told you" -care not for his displeasure."
"Ah, yes; he told me it was you who sacrificed to the demon
of speculation."

"Still, situated as we are" --

"Yes, do you know how we are situated? At his mother's ball
he danced once with Eugenie, and M. Cavalcanti three times,
"Then you are wrong, madame. Fortune is precarious; and if and he took no notice of it." The valet announced the
I were a woman and fate had made me a banker's wife, Vicomte Albert de Morcerf. The baroness rose hastily, and
whatever might be my confidence in my husband's good was going into the study, when Danglars stopped her. "Let
fortune, still in speculation you know there is great risk. Well, her alone," said he. She looked at him in amazement. Monte
I would secure for myself a fortune independent of him, Cristo appeared to be unconscious of what passed. Albert
even if I acquired it by placing my interests in hands entered, looking very handsome and in high spirits. He
unknown to him." Madame Danglars blushed, in spite of all bowed politely to the baroness, familiarly to Danglars, and
her efforts. "Stay," said Monte Cristo, as though he had not affectionately to Monte Cristo. Then turning to the baroness:
observed her confusion, "I have heard of a lucky hit that was "May I ask how Mademoiselle Danglars is?" said he.
made yesterday on the Neapolitan bonds."
"She is quite well," replied Danglars quickly; "she is at the
piano
with M. Cavalcanti." Albert retained his calm and
"I have none -- nor have I ever possessed any; but really we
have talked long enough of money, count, we are like two indifferent manner; he might feel perhaps annoyed, but he
stockbrokers; have you heard how fate is persecuting the knew Monte Cristo's eye was on him. "M. Cavalcanti has a
fine tenor voice," said he, "and Mademoiselle Eugenie a
poor Villeforts?"
splendid soprano, and then she plays the piano like Thalberg.
"What has happened?" said the count, simulating total The concert must be a delightful one."
ignorance.
"They suit each other remarkably well," said Danglars.
"You know the Marquis of Saint-Meran died a few days after Albert appeared not to notice this remark, which was,
he had set out on his journey to Paris, and the marchioness a however, so rude that Madame Danglars blushed.
few days after her arrival?"
"I, too," said the young man, "am a musician -- at least, my
"Yes," said Monte Cristo, "I have heard that; but, as Claudius masters used to tell me so; but it is strange that my voice
said to Hamlet, `it is a law of nature; their fathers died before never would suit any other, and a soprano less than any."
them, and they mourned their loss; they will die before their Danglars smiled, and seemed to say, "It is of no
children, who will, in their turn, grieve for them.'"
consequence." Then, hoping doubtless to effect his purpose,
he said, -- "The prince and my daughter were universally
"But that is not all."
admired yesterday. You were not of the party, M. de
"Not all!"
Morcerf?"
"No; they were going to marry their daughter" -"What prince?" asked Albert. "Prince Cavalcanti," said
"To M. Franz d'Epinay. Is it broken off?"
Danglars, who persisted in giving the young man that title.
"I was once very fond of it, but I do not indulge now."

"Yesterday morning, it appears, Franz declined the honor."

"Pardon me," said Albert, "I was not aware that he was a
prince. And Prince Cavalcanti sang with Mademoiselle
Eugenie yesterday? It must have been charming, indeed. I
"No."
regret not having heard them. But I was unable to accept
"How extraordinary! And how does M. de Villefort bear it?" your invitation, having promised to accompany my mother
to a German concert given by the Baroness of
"As usual. Like a philosopher." Danglars returned at this
Chateau-Renaud." This was followed by rather an awkward
moment alone. "Well," said the baroness, "do you leave M.
silence. "May I also be allowed," said Morcerf, "to pay my
Cavalcanti with your daughter?"
respects to Mademoiselle Danglars?" "Wait a moment," said
"And Mademoiselle d'Armilly," said the banker; "do you the banker, stopping the young man; "do you hear that
consider her no one?" Then, turning to Monte Cristo, he said, delightful cavatina? Ta, ta, ta, ti, ta, ti, ta, ta; it is charming,
"Prince Cavalcanti is a charming young man, is he not? But let them finish -- one moment. Bravo, bravi, brava!" The
is he really a prince?"
banker was enthusiastic in his applause.
"Indeed? And is the reason known?"

"I will not answer for it," said Monte Cristo. "His father was "Indeed," said Albert, "it is exquisite; it is impossible to
introduced to me as a marquis, so he ought to be a count; but understand the music of his country better than Prince
I do not think he has much claim to that title."
Cavalcanti does. You said prince, did you not? But he can
easily become one, if he is not already; it is no uncommon
"Why?" said the banker. "If he is a prince, he is wrong not to
thing in Italy. But to return to the charming musicians -- you
maintain his rank; I do not like any one to deny his origin."
should give us a treat, Danglars, without telling them there
"Oh, you are a thorough democrat," said Monte Cristo, is a stranger. Ask them to sing one more song; it is so
smiling.
delightful to hear music in the distance, when the musicians
"But do you see to what you are exposing yourself?" said the are unrestrained by observation."
baroness. "If, perchance, M. de Morcerf came, he would
314

Danglars was quite annoyed by the young man's
indifference. He took Monte Cristo aside. "What do you
think of our lover?" said he.
"He appears cool. But, then your word is given."
"Yes, doubtless I have promised to give my daughter to a
man who loves her, but not to one who does not. See him
there, cold as marble and proud like his father. If he were
rich, if he had Cavalcanti's fortune, that might be pardoned.
Ma foi, I haven't consulted my daughter; but if she has good
taste" --

turning to the count he said, "but will you undertake to
speak to the father?"
"Willingly, if you wish it."
"But let it be done explicitly and positively. If he demands
my daughter let him fix the day -- declare his conditions; in
short, let us either understand each other, or quarrel. You
understand -- no more delay."
"Yes. sir, I will give my attention to the subject."

"I do not say that I await with pleasure his decision, but I do
await it. A banker must, you know, be a slave to his
"Oh," said Monte Cristo, "my fondness may blind me, but I
promise." And Danglars sighed as M. Cavalcanti had done
assure you I consider Morcerf a charming young man who
half an hour before. "Bravi, bravo, brava!" cried Morcerf,
will render your daughter happy and will sooner or later
parodying the banker, as the selection came to an end.
attain a certain amount of distinction, and his father's
Danglars began to look suspiciously at Morcerf, when some
position is good."
one came and whispered a few words to him. "I shall soon
"Hem," said Danglars.
return," said the banker to Monte Cristo; "wait for me. I shall,
perhaps, have something to say to you." And he went out.
"Why do you doubt?"
The baroness took advantage of her husband's absence to
"The past -- that obscurity on the past."
push open the door of her daughter's study, and M. Andrea,
"But that does not affect the son."
who was sitting before the piano with Mademoiselle
Eugenie, started up like a jack-in-the-box. Albert bowed with
"Very true."
a smile to Mademoiselle Danglars, who did not appear in the
"Now, I beg of you, don't go off your head. It's a month now least disturbed, and returned his bow with her usual
that you have been thinking of this marriage, and you must coolness. Cavalcanti was evidently embarrassed; he bowed
see that it throws some responsibility on me, for it was at my to Morcerf, who replied with the most impertinent look
house you met this young Cavalcanti, whom I do not really possible. Then Albert launched out in praise of
know at all."
Mademoiselle Danglars' voice, and on his regret, after what
he had just heard, that he had been unable to be present the
previous evening. Cavalcanti, being left alone, turned to
"But I do."
Monte Cristo.
"Have you made inquiry?"
"Come," said Madame Danglars, "leave music and
"Is there any need of that! Does not his appearance speak for compliments, and let us go and take tea."
him? And he is very rich."
"Come, Louise," said Mademoiselle Danglars to her friend.
"I am not so sure of that."
They passed into the next drawing-room, where tea was
prepared. Just as they were beginning, in the English fashion,
"And yet you said he had money."
to leave the spoons in their cups, the door again opened and
"Fifty thousand livres -- a mere trifle."
Danglars entered, visibly agitated. Monte Cristo observed it
particularly, and by a look asked the banker for an
"He is well educated."
explanation. "I have just received my courier from Greece,"
"Hem," said Monte Cristo in his turn.
said Danglars.
"He is a musician."
"Ah, yes," said the count; "that was the reason of your
"So are all Italians."
running away from us."
"Come, count, you do not do that young man justice."

"Yes."

"Well, I acknowledge it annoys me, knowing your
connection with the Morcerf family, to see him throw
himself in the way." Danglars burst out laughing. "What a
Puritan you are!" said he; "that happens every day."

"How is King Otho getting on?" asked Albert in the most
sprightly tone. Danglars cast another suspicious look
towards him without answering, and Monte Cristo turned
away to conceal the expression of pity which passed over his
features, but which was gone in a moment. "We shall go
together, shall we not?" said Albert to the count.

"But you cannot break it off in this way; the Morcerfs are
depending on this union."
"Indeed."
"Positively."
"Then let them explain themselves; you should give the
father a hint, you are so intimate with the family."
"I? -- where the devil did you find out that?"
"At their ball; it was apparent enough. Why, did not the
countess, the proud Mercedes, the disdainful Catalane, who
will scarcely open her lips to her oldest acquaintances, take
your arm, lead you into the garden, into the private walks,
and remain there for half an hour?"

"If you like," replied the latter. Albert could not understand
the banker's look, and turning to Monte Cristo, who
understood it perfectly, -- "Did you see," said he, "how he
looked at me?"
"Yes," said the count; "but did you think there was anything
particular in his look?"
"Indeed, I did; and what does he mean by his news from
Greece?"
"How can I tell you?"
"Because I imagine you have correspondents in that
country." Monte Cristo smiled significantly.

"Ah, baron, baron," said Albert, "you are not listening -- what
"Stop," said Albert, "here he comes. I shall compliment
barbarism in a melomaniac like you!"
Mademoiselle Danglars on her cameo, while the father talks
"Oh, don't worry about me, Sir Mocker," said Danglars; then

315


CHAPTER 76


PROGRESS OF CAVALCANTI THE YOUNGER

to you."
"If you compliment her at all, let it be on her voice, at least,"
said Monte Cristo.

"Yes, I will tell you all; but take away the young man; I
cannot endure his presence."
"He is going with me. Shall I send the father to you?"

"No, every one would do that."

"Immediately."

"My dear viscount, you are dreadfully impertinent." Albert
advanced towards Eugenie, smiling. Meanwhile, Danglars,
stooping to Monte Cristo's ear, "Your advice was excellent,"
said he; "there is a whole history connected with the names
Fernand and Yanina."

"Very well." The count made a sign to Albert and they
bowed to the ladies, and took their leave, Albert perfectly
indifferent to Mademoiselle Danglars' contempt, Monte
Cristo reiterating his advice to Madame Danglars on the
prudence a banker's wife should exercise in providing for
the future. M. Cavalcanti remained master of the field.

"Indeed?" said Monte Cristo.

316


Chapter 77

S

carcely had the count's horses cleared the angle of the
boulevard, than Albert, turning towards the count, burst
into a loud fit of laughter -- much too loud in fact not to give
the idea of its being rather forced and unnatural. "Well," said
he, "I will ask you the same question which Charles IX. put
to Catherine de Medicis, after the massacre of Saint
Bartholomew, `How have I played my little part?'"
"To what do you allude?" asked Monte Cristo.
"To the installation of my rival at M. Danglars'."

Haidee
"Oh," said Albert with all the cajolery of which he was
capable. "You surely will not do that, my dear count?"
"Certainly I shall, Albert, as I have promised to do it."
"Well," said Albert, with a sigh, "it seems you are determined
to marry me."
"I am determined to try and be on good terms with
everybody, at all events," said Monte Cristo. "But apropos of
Debray, how is it that I have not seen him lately at the
baron's house?"

"What rival?"

"There has been a misunderstanding."
"Ma foi, what rival? Why, your protege, M. Andrea
"What, with the baroness?"
Cavalcanti!"
"No, with the baron."
"Ah, no joking, viscount, if you please; I do not patronize M.
"Has he perceived anything?"
Andrea -- at least, not as concerns M. Danglars."
"And you would be to blame for not assisting him, if the
young man really needed your help in that quarter, but,
happily for me, he can dispense with it."

"Ah, that is a good joke!"

"What, do you think he is paying his addresses?"

"Where have you come from, my dear count?" said Albert.

"I am certain of it; his languishing looks and modulated
tones when addressing Mademoiselle Danglars fully
proclaim his intentions. He aspires to the hand of the proud
Eugenie."

"From Congo, if you will."

"Do you think he suspects?" said Monte Cristo with
charming artlessness.

"It must be farther off than even that."
"But what do I know of your Parisian husbands?"

"What does that signify, so long as they favor your suit?"

"Oh, my dear count, husbands are pretty much the same
"But it is not the case, my dear count: on the contrary. I am everywhere; an individual husband of any country is a
pretty fair specimen of the whole race."
repulsed on all sides."
"But then, what can have led to the quarrel between
"What!"
Danglars and Debray? They seemed to understand each
"It is so indeed; Mademoiselle Eugenie scarcely answers me, other so well," said Monte Cristo with renewed energy.
and Mademoiselle d'Armilly, her confidant, does not speak
"Ah, now you are trying to penetrate into the mysteries of
to me at all."
Isis, in which I am not initiated. When M. Andrea Cavalcanti
"But the father has the greatest regard possible for you," said has become one of the family, you can ask him that
Monte Cristo.
question." The carriage stopped. "Here we are," said Monte
"He? Oh, no, he has plunged a thousand daggers into my Cristo; "it is only half-past ten o'clock, come in."
heart, tragedy-weapons, I own, which instead of wounding "Certainly I will."
sheathe their points in their own handles, but daggers which
"My carriage shall take you back."
he nevertheless believed to be real and deadly."
"No, thank you; I gave orders for my coupe to follow me."
"Jealousy indicates affection."
"There it is, then," said Monte Cristo, as he stepped out of the
carriage. They both went into the house; the drawing-room
"He is."
was lighted up -- they went in there. "You will make tea for
us, Baptistin," said the count. Baptistin left the room without
"Of whom? -- of Debray?"
waiting to answer, and in two seconds reappeared, bringing
"No, of you."
on a waiter all that his master had ordered, ready prepared,
"Of me? I will engage to say that before a week is past the and appearing to have sprung from the ground, like the
door will be closed against me."
repasts which we read of in fairy tales. "Really, my dear
count," said Morcerf. "what I admire in you is, not so much
"You are mistaken, my dear viscount."
your riches, for perhaps there are people even wealthier than
"Prove it to me."
yourself, nor is it only your wit, for Beaumarchais might
have possessed as much, -- but it is your manner of being
"Do you wish me to do so?"
served, without any questions, in a moment, in a second; it is
"Yes."
as it they guessed what you wanted by your manner of
"Well, I am charged with the commission of endeavoring to ringing, and made a point of keeping everything you can
induce the Comte de Morcerf to make some definite possibly desire in constant readiness."
arrangement with the baron."
"What you say is perhaps true; they know my habits. For
"True; but I am not jealous."

"By whom are you charged?"
"By the baron himself."

instance, you shall see; how do you wish to occupy yourself
during tea-time?"
317


CHAPTER 77

"Ma foi, I should like to smoke."
Monte Cristo took the gong and struck it once. In about the
space of a second a private door opened, and Ali appeared,
bringing two chibouques filled with excellent latakia. "It is
quite wonderful," said Albert.
"Oh no, it is as simple as possible," replied Monte Cristo. "Ali
knows I generally smoke while I am taking my tea or coffee;
he has heard that I ordered tea, and he also knows that I
brought you home with me; when I summoned him he
naturally guessed the reason of my doing so, and as he
comes from a country where hospitality is especially
manifested through the medium of smoking, he naturally
concludes that we shall smoke in company, and therefore
brings two chibouques instead of one -- and now the
mystery is solved."
"Certainly you give a most commonplace air to your
explanation, but it is not the less true that you -- Ah, but
what do I hear?" and Morcerf inclined his head towards the
door, through which sounds seemed to issue resembling
those of a guitar.

HAIDEE

"I thought so. But how did it happen that such a great
princess became a slave?"
"How was it that Dionysius the Tyrant became a
schoolmaster? The fortune of war, my dear viscount, -- the
caprice of fortune; that is the way in which these things are
to be accounted for."
"And is her name a secret?"
"As regards the generality of mankind it is; but not for you,
my dear viscount, who are one of my most intimate friends,
and on whose silence I feel I may rely, if I consider it
necessary to enjoin it -- may I not do so?"
"Certainly; on my word of honor."
"You know the history of the pasha of Yanina, do you not?"
"Of Ali Tepelini?* Oh, yes; it was in his service that my father
made his fortune."
"True, I had forgotten that."

* Ali Pasha, "The Lion," was born at Tepelini, an Albanian
village at the foot of the Klissoura Mountains, in 1741. By
"Ma foi, my dear viscount, you are fated to hear music this diplomacy and success in arms he became almost supreme
evening; you have only escaped from Mademoiselle ruler of Albania, Epirus, and adjacent territory. Having
aroused the enmity of the Sultan, he was proscribed and put
Danglars' piano, to be attacked by Haidee's guzla."
to death by treachery in 1822, at the age of eighty. -- Ed.
"Haidee -- what an adorable name! Are there, then, really
women who bear the name of Haidee anywhere but in "Well, what is Haidee to Ali Tepelini?"
Byron's poems?"
"Merely his daughter."
"Certainly there are. Haidee is a very uncommon name in "What? the daughter of Ali Pasha?"
France, but is common enough in Albania and Epirus; it is as
"Of Ali Pasha and the beautiful Vasiliki."
it you said, for example, Chastity, Modesty, Innocence, -- it is
"And your slave?"
a kind of baptismal name, as you Parisians call it."
"Oh, that is charming," said Albert, "how I should like to
hear my countrywomen called Mademoiselle Goodness,
Mademoiselle Silence, Mademoiselle Christian Charity! Only
think, then, if Mademoiselle Danglars, instead of being
called Claire-Marie-Eugenie, had been named Mademoiselle
Chastity-Modesty-Innocence Danglars; what a fine effect
that would have produced on the announcement of her
marriage!"
"Hush," said the count, "do not joke in so loud a tone; Haidee
may hear you, perhaps."
"And you think she would be angry?"
"No, certainly not," said the count with a haughty
expression.
"She is very amiable, then, is she not?" said Albert.
"It is not to be called amiability, it is her duty; a slave does
not dictate to a master."

"Ma foi, yes."
"But how did she become so?"
"Why, simply from the circumstance of my having bought
her one day, as I was passing through the market at
Constantinople."
"Wonderful! Really, my dear count, you seem to throw a sort
of magic influence over all in which you are concerned;
when I listen to you, existence no longer seems reality, but a
waking dream. Now, I am perhaps going to make an
imprudent and thoughtless request, but" -"Say on."
"But, since you go out with Haidee, and sometimes even take
her to the opera" -"Well?"
"I think I may venture to ask you this favor."

"Come; you are joking yourself now. Are there any more
slaves to be had who bear this beautiful name?"

"You may venture to ask me anything."

"Undoubtedly."

"I will do so; but on two conditions."

"Really, count, you do nothing, and have nothing like other
people. The slave of the Count of Monte Cristo! Why, it is a
rank of itself in France, and from the way in which you
lavish money, it is a place that must be worth a hundred
thousand francs a year."

"I accept them at once."

"Well then, my dear count, present me to your princess."

"The first is, that you will never tell any one that I have
granted the interview."
"Very well," said Albert, extending his hand; "I swear I will
not."

"A hundred thousand francs! The poor girl originally
possessed much more than that; she was born to treasures in "The second is, that you will not tell her that your father ever
comparison with which those recorded in the `Thousand and served hers."
One Nights' would seem but poverty."
"I give you my oath that I will not."
"She must be a princess then."
"Enough, viscount; you will remember those two vows, will
"You are right; and she is one of the greatest in her country you not? But I know you to be a man of honor." The count
too."
again struck the gong. Ali reappeared. "Tell Haidee," said he,
"that I will take coffee with her, and give her to understand
318

that I desire permission to present one of my friends to her."
Ali bowed and left the room. "Now, understand me," said
the count, "no direct questions, my dear Morcerf; if you wish
to know anything, tell me, and I will ask her."

room to execute the orders of his young mistress she
beckoned Albert to approach nearer to her. Monte Cristo and
Morcerf drew their seats towards a small table, on which
were arranged music, drawings, and vases of flowers. Ali
then entered bringing coffee and chibouques; as to M.
"Agreed." Ali reappeared for the third time, and drew back
Baptistin, this portion of the building was interdicted to him.
the tapestried hanging which concealed the door, to signify
Albert refused the pipe which the Nubian offered him. "Oh,
to his master and Albert that they were at liberty to pass on.
take it -- take it," said the count; "Haidee is almost as
"Let us go in," said Monte Cristo.
civilized as a Parisian; the smell of an Havana is disagreeable
Albert passed his hand through his hair, and curled his to her, but the tobacco of the East is a most delicious
mustache, then, having satisfied himself as to his personal perfume, you know."
appearance, followed the count into the room, the latter
Ali left the room. The cups of coffee were all prepared, with
having previously resumed his hat and gloves. Ali was
the addition of sugar, which had been brought for Albert.
stationed as a kind of advanced guard, and the door was
Monte Cristo and Haidee took the beverage in the original
kept by the three French attendants, commanded by Myrtho.
Arabian manner, that is to say, without sugar. Haidee took
Haidee was awaiting her visitors in the first room of her
the porcelain cup in her little slender fingers and conveyed it
apartments, which was the drawing-room. Her large eyes
to her mouth with all the innocent artlessness of a child
were dilated with surprise and expectation, for it was the
when eating or drinking something which it likes. At this
first time that any man, except Monte Cristo, had been
moment two women entered, bringing salvers filled with
accorded an entrance into her presence. She was sitting on a
ices and sherbet, which they placed on two small tables
sofa placed in an angle of the room, with her legs crossed
appropriated to that purpose. "My dear host, and you,
under her in the Eastern fashion, and seemed to have made
signora," said Albert, in Italian, "excuse my apparent
for herself, as it were, a kind of nest in the rich Indian silks
stupidity. I am quite bewildered, and it is natural that it
which enveloped her. Near her was the instrument on which
should be so. Here I am in the heart of Paris; but a moment
she had just been playing; it was elegantly fashioned, and
ago I heard the rumbling of the omnibuses and the tinkling
worthy of its mistress. On perceiving Monte Cristo, she arose
of the bells of the lemonade-sellers, and now I feel as if I
and welcomed him with a smile peculiar to herself,
were suddenly transported to the East; not such as I have
expressive at once of the most implicit obedience and also of
seen it, but such as my dreams have painted it. Oh, signora,
the deepest love. Monte Cristo advanced towards her and
if I could but speak Greek, your conversation, added to the
extended his hand, which she as usual raised to her lips.
fairy-scene which surrounds me, would furnish an evening
Albert had proceeded no farther than the door, where he of such delight as it would be impossible for me ever to
remained rooted to the spot, being completely fascinated by forget."
the sight of such surpassing beauty, beheld as it was for the
"I speak sufficient Italian to enable me to converse with you,
first time, and of which an inhabitant of more northern
sir," said Haidee quietly; "and if you like what is Eastern, I
climes could form no adequate idea.
will do my best to secure the gratification of your tastes
"Whom do you bring?" asked the young girl in Romaic, of while you are here."
Monte Cristo; "is it a friend, a brother, a simple acquaintance,
"On what subject shall I converse with her?" said Albert, in a
or an enemy."
low tone to Monte Cristo.
"A friend," said Monte Cristo in the same language.
"Just what you please; you may speak of her country and of
"What is his name?"
her youthful reminiscences, or if you like it better you can
"Count Albert; it is the same man whom I rescued from the talk of Rome, Naples, or Florence."
hands of the banditti at Rome."
"In what language would you like me to converse with
him?"

"Oh," said Albert, "it is of no use to be in the company of a
Greek if one converses just in the same style as with a
Parisian; let me speak to her of the East."

Monte Cristo turned to Albert. "Do you know modern "Do so then, for of all themes which you could choose that
will be the most agreeable to her taste." Albert turned
Greek," asked he.
towards Haidee. "At what age did you leave Greece,
"Alas, no," said Albert; "nor even ancient Greek, my dear signora?" asked he.
count; never had Homer or Plato a more unworthy scholar
"I left it when I was but five years old," replied Haidee.
than myself."
"Then," said Haidee, proving by her remark that she had "And have you any recollection of your country?"
quite understood Monte Cristo's question and Albert's
answer, "then I will speak either in French or Italian, if my
lord so wills it."

"When I shut my eyes and think, I seem to see it all again.
The mind can see as well as the body. The body forgets
sometimes -- but the mind never forgets."

Monte Cristo reflected one instant. "You will speak in
Italian," said he. Then, turning towards Albert, -- "It is a pity
you do not understand either ancient or modern Greek, both
of which Haidee speaks so fluently; the poor child will be
obliged to talk to you in Italian, which will give you but a
very false idea of her powers of conversation." The count
made a sign to Haidee to address his visitor. "Sir," she said to
Morcerf, "you are most welcome as the friend of my lord and
master." This was said in excellent Tuscan, and with that soft
Roman accent which makes the language of Dante as
sonorous as that of Homer. Then, turning to Ali, she directed
him to bring coffee and pipes, and when he had left the

"And how far back into the past do your recollections
extend?"
"I could scarcely walk when my mother, who was called
Vasiliki, which means royal," said the young girl, tossing her
head proudly, "took me by the hand, and after putting in our
purse all the money we possessed, we went out, both
covered with veils, to solicit alms for the prisoners, saying,
`He who giveth to the poor lendeth to the Lord.' Then when
our purse was full we returned to the palace, and without
saying a word to my father, we sent it to the convent, where
it was divided amongst the prisoners."
319


CHAPTER 77


HAIDEE

"And how old were you at that time?"

"I beg you to do so," replied Albert.

"I was three years old," said Haidee.

"Well, I was but four years old when one night I was
suddenly awakened by my mother. We were in the palace of
Yanina; she snatched me from the cushions on which I was
sleeping, and on opening my eyes I saw hers filled with tears.
She took me away without speaking. When I saw her
weeping I began to cry too. `Hush, child!' said she. At other
times in spite of maternal endearments or threats, I had with
a child's caprice been accustomed to indulge my feelings of
sorrow or anger by crying as much as I felt inclined; but on
this occasion there was an intonation of such extreme terror
in my mother's voice when she enjoined me to silence, that I
ceased crying as soon as her command was given. She bore
me rapidly away.

"Then you remember everything that went on about you
from the time when you were three years old?" said Albert.
"Everything."
"Count," said Albert, in a low tone to Monte Cristo, "do
allow the signora to tell me something of her history. You
prohibited my mentioning my father's name to her, but
perhaps she will allude to him of her own accord in the
course of the recital, and you have no idea how delighted I
should be to hear our name pronounced by such beautiful
lips." Monte Cristo turned to Haidee, and with an expression
of countenance which commanded her to pay the most
implicit attention to his words, he said in Greek, -- "Tell us
the fate of your father; but neither the name of the traitor nor
the treason." Haidee sighed deeply, and a shade of sadness
clouded her beautiful brow.

"I saw then that we were descending a large staircase;
around us were all my mother's servants carrying trunks,
bags, ornaments, jewels, purses of gold, with which they
were hurrying away in the greatest distraction.

"What are you saying to her?" said Morcerf in an undertone.

"Behind the women came a guard of twenty men armed with
long guns and pistols, and dressed in the costume which the
Greeks have assumed since they have again become a nation.
You may imagine there was something startling and
"Then," said Albert, "this pious pilgrimage in behalf of the ominous," said Haidee, shaking her head and turning pale at
prisoners was your first remembrance; what is the next?"
the mere remembrance of the scene, "in this long file of
"Oh, then I remember as if it were but yesterday sitting slaves and women only half-aroused from sleep, or at least
under the shade of some sycamore-trees, on the borders of a so they appeared to me, who was myself scarcely awake.
lake, in the waters of which the trembling foliage was Here and there on the walls of the staircase, were reflected
reflected as in a mirror. Under the oldest and thickest of gigantic shadows, which trembled in the flickering light of
these trees, reclining on cushions, sat my father; my mother the pine-torches till they seemed to reach to the vaulted roof
was at his feet, and I, childlike, amused myself by playing above.
with his long white beard which descended to his girdle, or "`Quick!' said a voice at the end of the gallery. This voice
with the diamond-hilt of the scimitar attached to his girdle. made every one bow before it, resembling in its effect the
Then from time to time there came to him an Albanian who wind passing over a field of wheat, by its superior strength
said something to which I paid no attention, but which he forcing every ear to yield obeisance. As for me, it made me
always answered in the same tone of voice, either `Kill,' or tremble. This voice was that of my father. He came last,
`Pardon.'"
clothed in his splendid robes and holding in his hand the
"I again reminded her that you were a friend, and that she
need not conceal anything from you."

"It is very strange," said Albert, "to hear such words proceed
from the mouth of any one but an actress on the stage, and
one needs constantly to be saying to one's self, `This is no
fiction, it is all reality,' in order to believe it. And how does
France appear in your eyes, accustomed as they have been to
gaze on such enchanted scenes?"

carbine which your emperor presented him. He was leaning
on the shoulder of his favorite Selim, and he drove us all
before him, as a shepherd would his straggling flock. My
father," said Haidee, raising her head, "was that illustrious
man known in Europe under the name of Ali Tepelini, pasha
of Yanina, and before whom Turkey trembled."

Albert, without knowing why, started on hearing these
words pronounced with such a haughty and dignified accent;
it appeared to him as if there was something supernaturally
gloomy and terrible in the expression which gleamed from
the brilliant eyes of Haidee at this moment; she appeared
like a Pythoness evoking a spectre, as she recalled to his
mind the remembrance of the fearful death of this man, to
the news of which all Europe had listened with horror.
"So young," said Albert, forgetting at the moment the
"Soon," said Haidee, "we halted on our march, and found
Count's command that he should ask no questions of the
ourselves on the borders of a lake. My mother pressed me to
slave herself, "is it possible that you can have known what
her throbbing heart, and at the distance of a few paces I saw
suffering is except by name?"
my father, who was glancing anxiously around. Four marble
Haidee turned her eyes towards Monte Cristo, who, making steps led down to the water's edge, and below them was a
at the same time some imperceptible sign, murmured, -- "Go boat floating on the tide.
on."
"From where we stood I could see in the middle of the lake a
"Nothing is ever so firmly impressed on the mind as the large blank mass; it was the kiosk to which we were going.
memory of our early childhood, and with the exception of This kiosk appeared to me to be at a considerable distance,
the two scenes I have just described to you, all my earliest perhaps on account of the darkness of the night, which
reminiscences are fraught with deepest sadness."
prevented any object from being more than partially
"Speak, speak, signora," said Albert, "I am listening with the discerned. We stepped into the boat. I remember well that
the oars made no noise whatever in striking the water, and
most intense delight and interest to all you say."
when I leaned over to ascertain the cause I saw that they
Haidee answered his remark with a melancholy smile. "You were muffled with the sashes of our Palikares.* Besides the
wish me, then, to relate the history of my past sorrows?" said rowers, the boat contained only the women, my father,
she.
mother, Selim, and myself. The Palikares had remained on
"I think it is a fine country," said Haidee, "but I see France as
it really is, because I look on it with the eyes of a woman;
whereas my own country, which I can only judge of from the
impression produced on my childish mind, always seems
enveloped in a vague atmosphere, which is luminous or
otherwise, according as my remembrances of it are sad or
joyous."

320

the shore of the lake, ready to cover our retreat; they were
kneeling on the lowest of the marble steps, and in that
manner intended making a rampart of the three others, in
case of pursuit. Our bark flew before the wind. `Why does
the boat go so fast?' asked I of my mother.

endeavoring to pierce with his eager looks the remotest
verge of the horizon, examining attentively every black
speck which appeared on the lake, while my mother,
reclining by his side, rested her head on his shoulder, and I
played at his feet, admiring everything I saw with that
unsophisticated innocence of childhood which throws a
* Greek militiamen in the war for independence. -- Ed.
charm round objects insignificant in themselves, but which
"`Silence, child! Hush, we are flying!' I did not understand. in its eyes are invested with the greatest importance. The
Why should my father fly? -- he, the all-powerful -- he, heights of Pindus towered above us; the castle of Yanina rose
before whom others were accustomed to fly -- he, who had white and angular from the blue waters of the lake, and the
taken for his device, `They hate me; then they fear me!' It immense masses of black vegetation which, viewed in the
was, indeed, a flight which my father was trying to effect. I distance, gave the idea of lichens clinging to the rocks, were
have been told since that the garrison of the castle of Yanina, in reality gigantic fir-trees and myrtles.
fatigued with long service" -"One morning my father sent for us; my mother had been
Here Haidee cast a significant glance at Monte Cristo, whose crying all the night, and was very wretched; we found the
eyes had been riveted on her countenance during the whole pasha calm, but paler than usual. `Take courage, Vasiliki,'
course of her narrative. The young girl then continued, said he; `to-day arrives the firman of the master, and my fate
speaking slowly, like a person who is either inventing or will be decided. If my pardon be complete, we shall return
suppressing some feature of the history which he is relating. triumphant to Yanina; if the news be inauspicious, we must
"You were saying, signora," said Albert, who was paying the fly this night.' -- `But supposing our enemy should not allow
most implicit attention to the recital, "that the garrison of us to do so?' said my mother. `Oh, make yourself easy on
Yanina, fatigued with long service" -that head,' said Ali, smiling; `Selim and his flaming lance
"Had treated with the Serasker* Koorshid, who had been will settle that matter. They would be glad to see me dead,
sent by the sultan to gain possession of the person of my but they would not like themselves to die with me.'
father; it was then that Ali Tepelini -- after having sent to the
sultan a French officer in whom he reposed great confidence
-- resolved to retire to the asylum which he had long before
prepared for himself, and which he called kataphygion, or
the refuge."

"My mother only answered by sighs to consolations which
she knew did not come from my father's heart. She prepared
the iced water which he was in the habit of constantly
drinking, -- for since his sojourn at the kiosk he had been
parched by the most violent fever, -- after which she
"And this officer," asked Albert, "do you remember his name, anointed his white beard with perfumed oil, and lighted his
signora?" Monte Cristo exchanged a rapid glance with the chibouque, which he sometimes smoked for hours together,
young girl, which was quite unperceived by Albert. "No," quietly watching the wreaths of vapor that ascended in
said she, "I do not remember it just at this moment; but if it spiral clouds and gradually melted away in the surrounding
should occur to me presently, I will tell you." Albert was on atmosphere. Presently he made such a sudden movement
the point of pronouncing his father's name, when Monte that I was paralyzed with fear. Then, without taking his eyes
Cristo gently held up his finger in token of reproach; the from the object which had first attracted his attention, he
asked for his telescope. My mother gave it him. and as she
young man recollected his promise, and was silent.
did so, looked whiter than the marble against which she
* A Turkish pasha in command of the troops of a province. -- leaned. I saw my father's hand tremble. `A boat! -- two! -Ed.
three!' murmured my, father; -- `four!' He then arose, seizing
"It was towards this kiosk that we were rowing. A his arms and priming his pistols. `Vasiliki,' said he to my
ground-floor, ornamented with arabesques, bathing its mother, trembling perceptibly, `the instant approaches
terraces in the water, and another floor, looking on the lake, which will decide everything. In the space of half an hour we
was all which was visible to the eye. But beneath the shall know the emperor's answer. Go into the cavern with
ground-floor, stretching out into the island, was a large Haidee.' -- `I will not quit you,' said Vasiliki; `if you die, my
subterranean cavern, to which my mother, myself, and the lord, I will die with you.' -- `Go to Selim!' cried my father.
women were conducted. In this place were together 60,000 `Adieu, my lord,' murmured my mother, determining
pouches and 200 barrels; the pouches contained 25,000,000 of quietly to await the approach of death. `Take away Vasiliki!'
money in gold, and the barrels were filled with 30,000 said my father to his Palikares.
pounds of gunpowder.
"As for me, I had been forgotten in the general confusion; I
"Near the barrels stood Selim, my father's favorite, whom I
mentioned to you just now. He stood watch day and night
with a lance provided with a lighted slowmatch in his hand,
and he had orders to blow up everything -- kiosk, guards,
women, gold, and Ali Tepelini himself -- at the first signal
given by my father. I remember well that the slaves,
convinced of the precarious tenure on which they held their
lives, passed whole days and nights in praying, crying, and
groaning. As for me, I can never forget the pale complexion
and black eyes of the young soldier, and whenever the angel
of death summons me to another world, I am quite sure I
shall recognize Selim. I cannot tell you how long we
remained in this state; at that period I did not even know
what time meant. Sometimes, but very rarely, my father
summoned me and my mother to the terrace of the palace;
these were hours of recreation for me, as I never saw
anything in the dismal cavern but the gloomy countenances
of the slaves and Selim's fiery lance. My father was

ran toward Ali Tepelini; he saw me hold out my arms to him,
and he stooped down and pressed my forehead with his lips.
Oh, how distinctly I remember that kiss! -- it was the last he
ever gave me, and I feel as if it were still warm on my
forehead. On descending, we saw through the lattice-work
several boats which were gradually becoming more distinct
to our view. At first they appeared like black specks, and
now they looked like birds skimming the surface of the
waves. During this time, in the kiosk at my father's feet, were
seated twenty Palikares, concealed from view by an angle of
the wall and watching with eager eyes the arrival of the
boats. They were armed with their long guns inlaid with
mother-of-pearl and silver, and cartridges in great numbers
were lying scattered on the floor. My father looked at his
watch, and paced up and down with a countenance
expressive of the greatest anguish. This was the scene which
presented itself to my view as I quitted my father after that
last kiss. My mother and I traversed the gloomy passage
321


CHAPTER 77

leading to the cavern. Selim was still at his post, and smiled
sadly on us as we entered. We fetched our cushions from the
other end of the cavern, and sat down by Selim. In great
dangers the devoted ones cling to each other; and, young as I
was, I quite understood that some imminent danger was
hanging over our heads."
Albert had often heard -- not from his father, for he never
spoke on the subject, but from strangers -- the description of
the last moments of the vizier of Yanina; he had read
different accounts of his death, but the story seemed to
acquire fresh meaning from the voice and expression of the
young girl, and her sympathetic accent and the melancholy
expression of her countenance at once charmed and horrified
him. As to Haidee, these terrible reminiscences seemed to
have overpowered her for a moment, for she ceased
speaking, her head leaning on her hand like a beautiful
flower bowing beneath the violence of the storm; and her
eyes gazing on vacancy indicated that she was mentally
contemplating the green summit of the Pindus and the blue
waters of the lake of Yanina, which, like a magic mirror,
seemed to reflect the sombre picture which she sketched.
Monte Cristo looked at her with an indescribable expression
of interest and pity.

HAIDEE

mother, `when your master's orders arrive, if it is the
poniard which he sends, instead of despatching us by that
horrible death which we both so much dread, you will
mercifully kill us with this same poniard, will you not?' -`Yes, Vasiliki,' replied Selim tranquilly.
"Suddenly we heard loud cries; and, listening, discerned that
they were cries of joy. The name of the French officer who
had been sent to Constantinople resounded on all sides
amongst our Palikares; it was evident that he brought the
answer of the emperor, and that it was favorable."
"And do you not remember the Frenchman's name?" said
Morcerf, quite ready to aid the memory of the narrator.
Monte Cristo made a sign to him to be silent.
"I do not recollect it," said Haidee.

"The noise increased; steps were heard approaching nearer
and nearer: they were descending the steps leading to the
cavern. Selim made ready his lance. Soon a figure appeared
in the gray twilight at the entrance of the cave, formed by the
reflection of the few rays of daylight which had found their
way into this gloomy retreat. `Who are you?' cried Selim.
`But whoever you may be, I charge you not to advance
another step.' -- `Long live the emperor!' said the figure. `He
grants a full pardon to the Vizier Ali, and not only gives him
"Go on," said the count in the Romaic language.
his life, but restores to him his fortune and his possessions.'
Haidee looked up abruptly, as if the sonorous tones of
My mother uttered a cry of joy, and clasped me to her bosom.
Monte Cristo's voice had awakened her from a dream; and
`Stop,' said Selim, seeing that she was about to go out; you
she resumed her narrative. "It was about four o'clock in the
see I have not yet received the ring,' -- `True,' said my
afternoon, and although the day was brilliant out-of-doors,
mother. And she fell on her knees, at the same time holding
we were enveloped in the gloomy darkness of the cavern.
me up towards heaven, as if she desired, while praying to
One single, solitary light was burning there, and it appeared
God in my behalf, to raise me actually to his presence."
like a star set in a heaven of blackness; it was Selim's flaming
lance. My mother was a Christian, and she prayed. Selim And for the second time Haidee stopped, overcome by such
repeated from time to time the sacred words: `God is great!' violent emotion that the perspiration stood upon her pale
However, my mother had still some hope. As she was brow, and her stifled voice seemed hardly able to find
coming down, she thought she recognized the French officer utterance, so parched and dry were her throat and lips.
who had been sent to Constantinople, and in whom my Monte Cristo poured a little iced water into a glass, and
father placed so much confidence; for he knew that all the presented it to her, saying with a mildness in which was also
soldiers of the French emperor were naturally noble and a shade of command, -- "Courage."
generous. She advanced some steps towards the staircase, Haidee dried her eyes, and continued: "By this time our eyes,
and listened. `They are approaching,' said she; `perhaps they habituated to the darkness, had recognized the messenger of
bring us peace and liberty!' -- `What do you fear, Vasiliki?' the pasha, -- it was a friend. Selim had also recognized him,
said Selim, in a voice at once so gentle and yet so proud. `If but the brave young man only acknowledged one duty,
they do not bring us peace, we will give them war; if they do which was to obey. `In whose name do you come?' said he to
not bring life, we will give them death.' And he renewed the him. `I come in the name of our master, Ali Tepelini.' -- `If
flame of his lance with a gesture which made one think of you come from Ali himself,' said Selim, `you know what you
Dionysus of Crete.* But I, being only a little child, was were charged to remit to me?' -- `Yes,' said the messenger,
terrified by this undaunted courage, which appeared to me `and I bring you his ring.' At these words he raised his hand
both ferocious and senseless, and I recoiled with horror from above his head, to show the token; but it was too far off, and
the idea of the frightful death amidst fire and flames which there was not light enough to enable Selim, where he was
probably awaited us.
standing, to distinguish and recognize the object presented
to his view. `I do not see what you have in your hand,' said
Selim. `Approach then,' said the messenger, `or I will come
nearer to you, if you prefer it.' -- `I will agree to neither one
nor the other,' replied the young soldier; `place the object
which I desire to see in the ray of light which shines there,
and retire while I examine it.' -- `Be it so,' said the envoy; and
"My mother experienced the same sensations, for I felt her
he retired, after having first deposited the token agreed on in
tremble. `Mamma, mamma,' said I, `are we really to be
the place pointed out to him by Selim.
killed?' And at the sound of my voice the slaves redoubled
their cries and prayers and lamentations. `My child,' said "Oh, how our hearts palpitated; for it did, indeed, seem to be
Vasiliki, `may God preserve you from ever wishing for that a ring which was placed there. But was it my father's ring?
death which to-day you so much dread!' Then, whispering to that was the question. Selim, still holding in his hand the
Selim, she asked what were her master's orders. `If he send lighted match, walked towards the opening in the cavern,
me his poniard, it will signify that the emperor's intentions and, aided by the faint light which streamed in through the
are not favorable, and I am to set fire to the powder; if, on mouth of the cave, picked up the token.
the contrary, he send me his ring, it will be a sign that the "`It is well,' said he, kissing it; `it is my master's ring!' And
emperor pardons him, and I am to extinguish the match and throwing the match on the ground, he trampled on it and
leave the magazine untouched.' -- `My friend,' said my extinguished it. The messenger uttered a cry of joy and
* The god of fruitfulness in Grecian mythology. In Crete he
was supposed to be slain in winter with the decay of
vegetation and to revive in the spring. Haidee's learned
reference is to the behavior of an actor in the Dionysian
festivals. -- Ed.

322

clapped his hands. At this signal four soldiers of the Serasker
Koorshid suddenly appeared, and Selim fell, pierced by five
blows. Each man had stabbed him separately, and,
intoxicated by their crime, though still pale with fear, they
sought all over the cavern to discover if there was any fear of
fire, after which they amused themselves by rolling on the
bags of gold. At this moment my mother seized me in her
arms, and hurrying noiselessly along numerous turnings
and windings known only to ourselves, she arrived at a
private staircase of the kiosk, where was a scene of frightful
tumult and confusion. The lower rooms were entirely filled
with Koorshid's troops; that is to say, with our enemies. Just
as my mother was on the point of pushing open a small door,
we heard the voice of the pasha sounding in a loud and
threatening tone. My mother applied her eye to the crack
between the boards; I luckily found a small opening which
afforded me a view of the apartment and what was passing
within. `What do you want?' said my father to some people
who were holding a paper inscribed with characters of gold.
`What we want,' replied one, `is to communicate to you the
will of his highness. Do you see this firman?' -- `I do,' said
my father. `Well, read it; he demands your head.'
"My father answered with a loud laugh, which was more
frightful than even threats would have been, and he had not
ceased when two reports of a pistol were heard; he had fired
them himself, and had killed two men. The Palikares, who
were prostrated at my father's feet, now sprang up and fired,
and the room was filled with fire and smoke. At the same
instant the firing began on the other side, and the balls
penetrated the boards all round us. Oh, how noble did the
grand vizier my father look at that moment, in the midst of
the flying bullets, his scimitar in his hand, and his face
blackened with the powder of his enemies! and how he
terrified them, even then, and made them fly before him!
`Selim, Selim!' cried he, `guardian of the fire, do your duty!'
-- `Selim is dead,' replied a voice which seemed to come from
the depths of the earth, `and you are lost, Ali!' At the same
moment an explosion was heard, and the flooring of the
room in which my father was sitting was suddenly torn up
and shivered to atoms -- the troops were firing from
underneath. Three or four Palikares fell with their bodies
literally ploughed with wounds.
"My father howled aloud, plunged his fingers into the holes
which the balls had made, and tore up one of the planks
entire. But immediately through this opening twenty more
shots were fired, and the flame, rushing up like fire from the
crater of a volcano, soon reached the tapestry, which it
quickly devoured. In the midst of all this frightful tumult
and these terrific cries, two reports, fearfully distinct,
followed by two shrieks more heartrending than all, froze
me with terror. These two shots had mortally wounded my
father, and it was he who had given utterance to these
frightful cries. However, he remained standing, clinging to a
window. My mother tried to force the door, that she might
go and die with him, but it was fastened on the inside. All
around him were lying the Palikares, writhing in convulsive
agonies, while two or three who were only slightly wounded
were trying to escape by springing from the windows. At
this crisis the whole flooring suddenly gave way. my father
fell on one knee, and at the same moment twenty hands
were thrust forth, armed with sabres, pistols, and poniards -twenty blows were instantaneously directed against one
man, and my father disappeared in a whirlwind of fire and
smoke kindled by these demons, and which seemed like hell

itself opening beneath his feet. I felt myself fall to the ground,
my mother had fainted."
Haidee's arms fell by her side, and she uttered a deep groan,
at the same time looking towards the count as if to ask if he
were satisfied with her obedience to his commands. Monte
Cristo arose and approached her, took her hand, and said to
her in Romaic, "Calm yourself, my dear child, and take
courage in remembering that there is a God who will punish
traitors."
"It is a frightful story, count," said Albert, terrified at the
paleness of Haidee's countenance, "and I reproach myself
now for having been so cruel and thoughtless in my
request."
"Oh, it is nothing," said Monte Cristo. Then, patting the
young girl on the head, he continued, "Haidee is very
courageous, and she sometimes even finds consolation in the
recital of her misfortunes."
"Because, my lord." said Haidee eagerly, "my miseries recall
to me the remembrance of your goodness."
Albert looked at her with curiosity, for she had not yet
related what he most desired to know, -- how she had
become the slave of the count. Haidee saw at a glance the
same expression pervading the countenances of her two
auditors; she exclaimed, `When my mother recovered her
senses we were before the serasker. `Kill,' said she, `but spare
the honor of the widow of Ali.' -- `It is not to me to whom
you must address yourself,' said Koorshid.
"`To whom, then?' -- `To your new master.'
"`Who and where is he?' -- `He is here.'
"And Koorshid pointed out one who had more than any
contributed to the death of my father," said Haidee, in a tone
of chastened anger. "Then," said Albert, "you became the
property of this man?"
"No," replied Haidee, "he did not dare to keep us, so we
were sold to some slave-merchants who were going to
Constantinople. We traversed Greece, and arrived half dead
at the imperial gates. They were surrounded by a crowd of
people, who opened a way for us to pass, when suddenly
my mother, having looked closely at an object which was
attracting their attention, uttered a piercing cry and fell to
the ground, pointing as she did so to a head which was
placed over the gates, and beneath which were inscribed
these words:
"`This is the head of Ali Tepelini Pasha of Yanina.' I cried
bitterly, and tried to raise my mother from the earth, but she
was dead! I was taken to the slave-market, and was
purchased by a rich Armenian. He caused me to be
instructed, gave me masters, and when I was thirteen years
of age he sold me to the Sultan Mahmood."
"Of whom I bought her," said Monte Cristo, "as I told you,
Albert, with the emerald which formed a match to the one I
had made into a box for the purpose of holding my hashish
pills."
"Oh, you are good, you are great, my lord!" said Haidee,
kissing the count's hand, "and I am very fortunate in
belonging to such a master!" Albert remained quite
bewildered with all that he had seen and heard. "Come,
finish your cup of coffee," said Monte Cristo; "the history is
ended."

323


CHAPTER 78


Chapter 78

WE HEAR FROM YANINA

We Hear From Yanina

I

f Valentine could have seen the trembling step and
agitated countenance of Franz when he quitted the
chamber of M. Noirtier, even she would have been
constrained to pity him. Villefort had only just given
utterance to a few incoherent sentences, and then retired to
his study, where he received about two hours afterwards the
following letter: -"After all the disclosures which were made this morning, M.
Noirtier de Villefort must see the utter impossibility of any
alliance being formed between his family and that of M.
Franz d'Epinay. M. d'Epinay must say that he is shocked and
astonished that M. de Villefort, who appeared to be aware of
all the circumstances detailed this morning, should not have
anticipated him in this announcement."
No one who had seen the magistrate at this moment, so
thoroughly unnerved by the recent inauspicious
combination of circumstances, would have supposed for an
instant that he had anticipated the annoyance; although it
certainly never had occurred to him that his father would
carry candor, or rather rudeness, so far as to relate such a
history. And in justice to Villefort, it must be understood that
M. Noirtier, who never cared for the opinion of his son on
any subject, had always omitted to explain the affair to
Villefort, so that he had all his life entertained the belief that
General de Quesnel, or the Baron d'Epinay, as he was
alternately styled, according as the speaker wished to
identify him by his own family name, or by the title which
had been conferred on him, fell the victim of assassination,
and not that he was killed fairly in a duel. This harsh letter,
coming as it did from a man generally so polite and
respectful, struck a mortal blow at the pride of Villefort.
Hardly had he read the letter, when his wife entered. The
sudden departure of Franz, after being summoned by M.
Noirtier, had so much astonished every one, that the position
of Madame de Villefort, left alone with the notary and the
witnesses, became every moment more embarrassing.
Determined to bear it no longer, she arose and left the room;
saying she would go and make some inquiries into the cause
of his sudden disappearance.
M. de Villefort's communications on the subject were very
limited and concise; he told her, in fact, that an explanation
had taken place between M. Noirtier, M. d'Epinay, and
himself, and that the marriage of Valentine and Franz would
consequently be broken off. This was an awkward and
unpleasant thing to have to report to those who were
awaiting her return in the chamber of her father-in-law. She
therefore contented herself with saying that M. Noirtier
having at the commencement of the discussion been attacked
by a sort of apoplectic fit, the affair would necessarily be
deferred for some days longer. This news, false as it was
following so singularly in the train of the two similar
misfortunes which had so recently occurred, evidently
astonished the auditors, and they retired without a word.
During this time Valentine, at once terrified and happy, after
having embraced and thanked the feeble old man for thus
breaking with a single blow the chain which she had been
accustomed to consider as irrefragable, asked leave to retire
to her own room, in order to recover her composure.
Noirtier looked the permission which she solicited. But
instead of going to her own room, Valentine, having once
gained her liberty, entered the gallery, and, opening a small

324

door at the end of it. found herself at once in the garden.
In the midst of all the strange events which had crowded one
on the other, an indefinable sentiment of dread had taken
possession of Valentine's mind. She expected every moment
that she should see Morrel appear, pale and trembling, to
forbid the signing of the contract, like the Laird of
Ravenswood in "The Bride of Lammermoor." It was high
time for her to make her appearance at the gate, for
Maximilian had long awaited her coming. He had half
guessed what was going on when he saw Franz quit the
cemetery with M. de Villefort. He followed M. d'Epinay, saw
him enter, afterwards go out, and then re-enter with Albert
and Chateau-Renaud. He had no longer any doubts as to the
nature of the conference; he therefore quickly went to the
gate in the clover-patch, prepared to hear the result of the
proceedings, and very certain that Valentine would hasten to
him the first moment she should he set at liberty. He was not
mistaken; peering through the crevices of the wooden
partition, he soon discovered the young girl, who cast aside
all her usual precautions and walked at once to the barrier.
The first glance which Maximilian directed towards her
entirely reassured him, and the first words she spoke made
his heart bound with delight.
"We are saved!" said Valentine. "Saved?" repeated Morrel,
not being able to conceive such intense happiness; "by
whom?"
"By my grandfather. Oh, Morrel, pray love him for all his
goodness to us!" Morrel swore to love him with all his soul;
and at that moment he could safely promise to do so, for he
felt as though it were not enough to love him merely as a
friend or even as a father. "But tell me, Valentine, how has it
all been effected? What strange means has he used to
compass this blessed end?"
Valentine was on the point of relating all that had passed,
but she suddenly remembered that in doing so she must
reveal a terrible secret which concerned others as well as her
grandfather, and she said, "At some future time I will tell
you all about it."
"But when will that be?"
"When I am your wife."
The conversation had now turned upon a topic so pleasing
to Morrel, that he was ready to accede to anything that
Valentine thought fit to propose, and he likewise felt that a
piece of intelligence such as he just heard ought to be more
than sufficient to content him for one day. However, he
would not leave without the promise of seeing Valentine
again the next night. Valentine promised all that Morrel
required of her, and certainly it was less difficult now for her
to believe that she should marry Maximilian than it was an
hour ago to assure herself that she should not marry Franz.
During the time occupied by the interview we have just
detailed, Madame de Villefort had gone to visit M. Noirtier.
The old man looked at her with that stern and forbidding
expression with which he was accustomed to receive her.
"Sir," said she, "it is superfluous for me to tell you that
Valentine's marriage is broken off, since it was here that the
affair was concluded." Noirtier's countenance remained
immovable. "But one thing I can tell you, of which I do not

think you are aware; that is, that I have always been opposed
to this marriage, and that the contract was entered into
entirely without my consent or approbation." Noirtier
regarded his daughter-in-law with the look of a man
desiring an explanation. "Now that this marriage, which I
know you so much disliked, is done away with, I come to
you on an errand which neither M. de Villefort nor Valentine
could consistently undertake." Noirtier's eyes demanded the
nature of her mission. "I come to entreat you, sir," continued
Madame de Villefort, "as the only one who has the right of
doing so, inasmuch as I am the only one who will receive no
personal benefit from the transaction, -- I come to entreat
you to restore, not your love, for that she has always
possessed, but to restore your fortune to your
granddaughter."
There was a doubtful expression in Noirtier's eyes; he was
evidently trying to discover the motive of this proceeding,
and he could not succeed in doing so. "May I hope, sir," said
Madame de Villefort, "that your intentions accord with my
request?" Noirtier made a sign that they did. "In that case,
sir," rejoined Madame de Villefort, "I will leave you
overwhelmed with gratitude and happiness at your prompt
acquiescence to my wishes." She then bowed to M. Noirtier
and retired.
The next day M. Noirtier sent for the notary; the first will
was torn up and a second made, in which he left the whole
of his fortune to Valentine, on condition that she should
never be separated from him. It was then generally reported
that Mademoiselle de Villefort, the heiress of the marquis
and marchioness of Saint-Meran, had regained the good
graces of her grandfather, and that she would ultimately be
in possession of an income of 300,000 livres.
While all the proceedings relative to the dissolution of the
marriage-contract were being carried on at the house of M.
de Villefort, Monte Cristo had paid his visit to the Count of
Morcerf, who, in order to lose no time in responding to M.
Danglars' wishes, and at the same time to pay all due
deference to his position in society, donned his uniform of
lieutenant-general, which he ornamented with all his crosses,
and thus attired, ordered his finest horses and drove to the
Rue de la Chausse d'Antin.
Danglars was balancing his monthly accounts, and it was
perhaps not the most favorable moment for finding him in
his best humor. At the first sight of his old friend, Danglars
assumed his majestic air, and settled himself in his
easy-chair. Morcerf, usually so stiff and formal, accosted the
banker in an affable and smiling manner, and, feeling sure
that the overture he was about make would be well received,
he did not consider it necessary to adopt any manoeuvres in
order to gain his end, but went at once straight to the point.
"Well, baron," said he, "here I am at last; some time has
elapsed since our plans were formed, and they are not yet
executed." Morcerf paused at these words, quietly waiting
till the cloud should have dispersed which had gathered on
the brow of Danglars, and which he attributed to his silence;
but, on the contrary, to his great surprise, it grew darker and
darker. "To what do you allude, monsieur?" said Danglars;
as if he were trying in vain to guess at the possible meaning
of the general's words.
"Ah," said Morcerf, "I see you are a stickler for forms, my
dear sir, and you would remind me that the ceremonial rites
should not be omitted. Ma foi, I beg your pardon, but as I
have but one son, and it is the first time I have ever thought
of marrying him, I am still serving my apprenticeship, you
know; come, I will reform." And Morcerf with a forced smile
arose, and, making a low bow to M. Danglars, said: "Baron, I
have the honor of asking of you the hand of Mademoiselle

Eugenie Danglars for my son, the Vicomte Albert de
Morcerf."
But Danglars, instead of receiving this address in the
favorable manner which Morcerf had expected, knit his
brow, and without inviting the count, who was still standing,
to take a seat. he said: "Monsieur, it will be necessary to
reflect before I give you an answer."
"To reflect?" said Morcerf, more and more astonished; "have
you not had enough time for reflection during the eight
years which have elapsed since this marriage was first
discussed between us?"
"Count," said the banker, "things are constantly occurring in
the world to induce us to lay aside our most established
opinions, or at all events to cause us to remodel them
according to the change of circumstances, which may have
placed affairs in a totally different light to that in which we
at first viewed them."
"I do not understand you, baron," said Morcerf.
"What I mean to say is this, sir, -- that during the last
fortnight unforeseen circumstances have occurred" -"Excuse me," said Morcerf, "but is it a play we are acting?"
"A play?"
"Yes, for it is like one; pray let us come more to the point,
and endeavor thoroughly to understand each other."
"That is quite my desire."
"You have seen M. de Monte Cristo have you not?"
"I see him very often," said Danglars, drawing himself up;
"he is a particular friend of mine."
"Well, in one of your late conversations with him, you said
that I appeared to be forgetful and irresolute concerning this
marriage, did you not?"
"I did say so."
"Well, here I am, proving at once that I am really neither the
one nor the other, by entreating you to keep your promise on
that score."
Danglars did not answer. "Have you so soon changed your
mind," added Morcerf, "or have you only provoked my
request that you may have the pleasure of seeing me
humbled?" Danglars, seeing that if he continued the
conversation in the same tone in which he had begun it, the
whole thing might turn out to his own disadvantage, turned
to Morcerf, and said: "Count, you must doubtless be
surprised at my reserve, and I assure you it costs me much to
act in such a manner towards you; but, believe me when I
say that imperative necessity has imposed the painful task
upon me."
"These are all so many empty words, my dear sir," said
Morcerf: "they might satisfy a new acquaintance, but the
Comte de Morcerf does not rank in that list; and when a man
like him comes to another, recalls to him his plighted word,
and this man fails to redeem the pledge, he has at least a
right to exact from him a good reason for so doing."
Danglars was a coward, but did not wish to appear so; he
was piqued at the tone which Morcerf had just assumed. "I
am not without a good reason for my conduct," replied the
banker.
"What do you mean to say?"
"I mean to say that I have a good reason, but that it is
difficult to explain."
"You must be aware, at all events, that it is impossible for me
to understand motives before they are explained to me; but
325


CHAPTER 78


WE HEAR FROM YANINA

one thing at least is clear, which is, that you decline allying
yourself with my family."

conversation Morcerf had never once dared to ask if it was
on his own account that Danglars recalled his word. That
evening he had a long conference with several friends; and
"No, sir," said Danglars; "I merely suspend my decision, that
M. Cavalcanti, who had remained in the drawing-room with
is all."
the ladies, was the last to leave the banker's house.
"And do you really flatter yourself that I shall yield to all
The next morning, as soon as he awoke, Danglars asked for
your caprices, and quietly and humbly await the time of
the newspapers; they were brought to him; he laid aside
again being received into your good graces?"
three or four, and at last fixed on the Impartial, the paper of
"Then, count, if you will not wait, we must look upon these which Beauchamp was the chief editor. He hastily tore off
projects as if they had never been entertained." The count bit the cover, opened the journal with nervous precipitation,
his lips till the blood almost started, to prevent the ebullition passed contemptuously over the Paris jottings, and arriving
of anger which his proud and irritable temper scarcely at the miscellaneous intelligence, stopped with a malicious
allowed him to restrain; understanding, however, that in the smile, at a paragraph headed "We hear from Yanina." "Very
present state of things the laugh would decidedly be against good," observed Danglars, after having read the paragraph;
him, he turned from the door, towards which he had been "here is a little article on Colonel Fernand, which, if I am not
directing his steps, and again confronted the banker. A cloud mistaken, would render the explanation which the Comte de
settled on his brow, evincing decided anxiety and uneasiness, Morcerf required of me perfectly unnecessary."
instead of the expression of offended pride which had lately
At the same moment, that is, at nine o'clock in the morning,
reigned there. "My dear Danglars," said Morcerf, "we have
Albert de Morcerf, dressed in a black coat buttoned up to his
been acquainted for many years, and consequently we ought
chin, might have been seen walking with a quick and
to make some allowance for each other's failings. You owe
agitated step in the direction of Monte Cristo's house in the
me an explanation, and really it is but fair that I should
Champs Elysees. When he presented himself at the gate the
know what circumstance has occurred to deprive my son of
porter informed him that the Count had gone out about half
your favor."
an hour previously. "Did he take Baptistin with him?"
"It is from no personal ill-feeling towards the viscount, that
"No, my lord."
is all I can say, sir," replied Danglars, who resumed his
insolent manner as soon as he perceived that Morcerf was a "Call him, then; I wish to speak to him." The concierge went
little softened and calmed down. "And towards whom do to seek the valet de chambre, and returned with him in an
you bear this personal ill-feeling, then?" said Morcerf, instant.
turning pale with anger. The expression of the count's face
"My good friend," said Albert, "I beg pardon for my
had not remained unperceived by the banker; he fixed on
intrusion, but I was anxious to know from your own mouth
him a look of greater assurance than before, and said: "You
if your master was really out or not."
may, perhaps, be better satisfied that I should not go farther
"He is really out, sir," replied Baptistin.
into particulars."
A tremor of suppressed rage shook the whole frame of the
count, and making a violent effort over himself, he said: "I
have a right to insist on your giving me an explanation. Is it
Madame de Morcerf who has displeased you? Is it my
fortune which you find insufficient? Is it because my
opinions differ from yours?"
"Nothing of the kind, sir," replied Danglars: "if such had
been the case, I only should have been to blame, inasmuch as
I was aware of all these things when I made the engagement.
No, do not seek any longer to discover the reason. I really
am quite ashamed to have been the cause of your
undergoing such severe self-examination; let us drop the
subject, and adopt the middle course of delay, which implies
neither a rupture nor an engagement. Ma foi, there is no
hurry. My daughter is only seventeen years old, and your
son twenty-one. While we wait, time will be progressing,
events will succeed each other; things which in the evening
look dark and obscure, appear but too clearly in the light of
morning, and sometimes the utterance of one word, or the
lapse of a single day, will reveal the most cruel calumnies."

"Out, even to me?"
"I know how happy my master always is to receive the
vicomte," said Baptistin; "and I should therefore never think
of including him in any general order."
"You are right; and now I wish to see him on an affair of
great importance. Do you think it will be long before he
comes in?"
"No, I think not, for he ordered his breakfast at ten o'clock."
"Well, I will go and take a turn in the Champs Elysees, and at
ten o'clock I will return here; meanwhile, if the count should
come in, will you beg him not to go out again without seeing
me?"
"You may depend on my doing so, sir," said Baptistin.
Albert left the cab in which he had come at the count's door,
intending to take a turn on foot. As he was passing the Allee
des Veuves, he thought he saw the count's horses standing at
Gosset's shooting-gallery; he approached, and soon
recognized the coachman. "Is the count shooting in the
gallery?" said Morcerf.

"Calumnies, did you say, sir?" cried Morcerf, turning livid
"Yes, sir," replied the coachman. While he was speaking,
with rage. "Does any one dare to slander me?"
Albert had heard the report of two or three pistol-shots. He
"Monsieur, I told you that I considered it best to avoid all
entered, and on his way met the waiter. "Excuse me, my
explanation."
lord," said the lad; "but will you have the kindness to wait a
"Then, sir, I am patiently to submit to your refusal?"
moment?"
"Yes, sir, although I assure you the refusal is as painful for
me to give as it is for you to receive, for I had reckoned on
the honor of your alliance, and the breaking off of a marriage
contract always injures the lady more than the gentleman."
"Enough, sir," said Morcerf, "we will speak no more on the
subject." And clutching his gloves in anger, he left the
apartment. Danglars observed that during the whole
326

"What for, Philip?" asked Albert, who, being a constant
visitor there, did not understand this opposition to his
entrance.
"Because the person who is now in the gallery prefers being
alone, and never practices in the presence of any one."
"Not even before you, Philip? Then who loads his pistol?"

"His servant."
"A Nubian?"
"A negro."
"It is he, then."
"Do you know this gentleman?"
"Yes, and I am come to look for him; he is a friend of mine."
"Oh, that is quite another thing, then. I will go immediately
and inform him of your arrival." And Philip, urged by his
own curiosity, entered the gallery; a second afterwards,
Monte Cristo appeared on the threshold. "I ask your pardon,
my dear count," said Albert, "for following you here, and I
must first tell you that it was not the fault of your servants
that I did so; I alone am to blame for the indiscretion. I went
to your house, and they told me you were out, but that they
expected you home at ten o'clock to breakfast. I was walking
about in order to pass away the time till ten o'clock, when I
caught sight of your carriage and horses."
"What you have just said induces me to hope that you intend
breakfasting with me."
"No, thank you, I am thinking of other things besides
breakfast just now; perhaps we may take that meal at a later
hour and in worse company."
"What on earth are you talking of?"
"I am to fight to-day."
"For what?"
"I am going to fight" -"Yes, I understand that, but what is the quarrel? People fight
for all sorts of reasons, you know."-

himself. "Now let us talk the matter over quietly," said the
count.
"You see I am perfectly composed," said Albert.
"With whom are you going to fight?"
"With Beauchamp."
"One of your friends!"
"Of course; it is always with friends that one fights."
"I suppose you have some cause of quarrel?"
"I have."
"What has he done to you?"
"There appeared in his journal last night -- but wait, and
read for yourself." And Albert handed over the paper to the
count, who read as follows: -"A correspondent at Yanina informs us of a fact of which
until now we had remained in ignorance. The castle which
formed the protection of the town was given up to the Turks
by a French officer named Fernand, in whom the grand
vizier, Ali Tepelini, had reposed the greatest confidence."
"Well," said Monte Cristo, "what do you see in that to annoy
you?"
"What do I see in it?"
"Yes; what does it signify to you if the castle of Yanina was
given up by a French officer?"
"It signifies to my father, the Count of Morcerf, whose
Christian name is Fernand!"
"Did your father serve under Ali Pasha?"

"I fight in the cause of honor."

"Yes; that is to say, he fought for the independence of the
Greeks, and hence arises the calumny."

"Ah, that is something serious."

"Oh, my dear viscount, do talk reason!"

"So serious, that I come to beg you to render me a service."

"I do not desire to do otherwise."

"What is it?"

"Now, just tell me who the devil should know in France that
the officer Fernand and the Count of Morcerf are one and the
same person? and who cares now about Yanina, which was
taken as long ago as the year 1822 or 1823?"

"To be my second."
"That is a serious matter, and we will not discuss it here; let
us speak of nothing till we get home. Ali, bring me some
water." The count turned up his sleeves, and passed into the
little vestibule where the gentlemen were accustomed to
wash their hands after shooting. "Come in, my lord," said
Philip in a low tone, "and I will show you something droll."
Morcerf entered, and in place of the usual target, he saw
some playing-cards fixed against the wall. At a distance
Albert thought it was a complete suit, for he counted from
the ace to the ten. "Ah, ha," said Albert, "I see you were
preparing for a game of cards."
"No," said the count, "I was making a suit."
"How?" said Albert.
"Those are really aces and twos which you see, but my shots
have turned them into threes, fives, sevens, eights, nines,
and tens." Albert approached. In fact, the bullets had actually
pierced the cards in the exact places which the painted signs
would otherwise have occupied, the lines and distances
being as regularly kept as if they had been ruled with pencil.
"Diable," said Morcerf.
"What would you have, my dear viscount?" said Monte
Cristo, wiping his hands on the towel which Ali had brought
him; "I must occupy my leisure moments in some way or
other. But come, I am waiting for you." Both men entered
Monte Cristo's carriage, which in the course of a few minutes
deposited them safely at No. 30. Monte Cristo took Albert
into his study, and pointing to a seat, placed another for

"That just shows the meanness of this slander. They have
allowed all this time to elapse, and then all of a sudden rake
up events which have been forgotten to furnish materials for
scandal, in order to tarnish the lustre of our high position. I
inherit my father's name, and I do not choose that the
shadow of disgrace should darken it. I am going to
Beauchamp, in whose journal this paragraph appears, and I
shall insist on his retracting the assertion before two
witnesses."
"Beauchamp will never retract."
"Then he must fight."
"No he will not, for he will tell you, what is very true, that
perhaps there were fifty officers in the Greek army bearing
the same name."
"We will fight, nevertheless. I will efface that blot on my
father's character. My father, who was such a brave soldier,
whose career was so brilliant" -"Oh, well, he will add, `We are warranted in believing that
this Fernand is not the illustrious Count of Morcerf, who also
bears the same Christian name.'"
"I am determined not to be content with anything short of an
entire retractation."
"And you intend to make him do it in the presence of two
witnesses, do you?"
327


CHAPTER 78


WE HEAR FROM YANINA

"Yes."

"I do -- most decidedly."

"You do wrong."

"Then let me offer one more word of advice."

"Which means, I suppose, that you refuse the service which I
asked of you?"

"Do so, then, but let it be the last."

"You know my theory regarding duels; I told you my
opinion on that subject, if you remember, when we were at
Rome."
"Nevertheless, my dear count, I found you this morning
engaged in an occupation but little consistent with the
notions you profess to entertain."
"Because, my dear fellow, you understand one must never be
eccentric. If one's lot is cast among fools, it is necessary to
study folly. I shall perhaps find myself one day called out by
some harebrained scamp, who has no more real cause of
quarrel with me than you have with Beauchamp; he may
take me to task for some foolish trifle or other, he will bring
his witnesses, or will insult me in some public place, and I
am expected to kill him for all that."
"You admit that you would fight, then? Well, if so, why do
you object to my doing so?"
"I do not say that you ought not to fight, I only say that a
duel is a serious thing, and ought not to be undertaken
without due reflection."
"Did he reflect before he insulted my father?"
"If he spoke hastily, and owns that he did so, you ought to be
satisfied."
"Ah, my dear count, you are far too indulgent."
"And you are far too exacting. Supposing, for instance, and
do not be angry at what I am going to say" -"Well."
"Supposing the assertion to be really true?"
"A son ought not to submit to such a stain on his father's
honor."
"Ma foi, we live in times when there is much to which we
must submit."
"That is precisely the fault of the age."
"And do you undertake to reform it?"
"Yes, as far as I am personally concerned."
"Well, you the indeed exacting, my dear fellow!"

"You do not wish to hear it, perhaps?"
"On the contrary, I request it."
"Do not take any witnesses with you when you go to
Beauchamp -- visit him alone."
"That would be contrary to all custom."
"Your case is not an ordinary one."
"And what is your reason for advising me to go alone?"
"Because then the affair will rest between you and
Beauchamp."
"Explain yourself."
"I will do so. If Beauchamp be disposed to retract, you ought
at least to give him the opportunity of doing it of his own
free will, -- the satisfaction to you will be the same. If, on the
contrary, he refuses to do so, it will then be quite time
enough to admit two strangers into your secret."
"They will not be strangers, they will be friends."
"Ah, but the friends of to-day are the enemies of to-morrow;
Beauchamp, for instance."
"So you recommend" -"I recommend you to be prudent."
"Then you advise me to go alone to Beauchamp?"
"I do, and I will tell you why. When you wish to obtain some
concession from a man's self-love, you must avoid even the
appearance of wishing to wound it."
"I believe you are right."
"I am glad of it."
"Then I will go alone."
"Go; but you would do better still by not going at all."
"That is impossible."
"Do so, then; it will be a wiser plan than the first which you
proposed."
"But if, in spite of all my precautions, I am at last obliged to
fight, will you not be my second?"

"Not when it comes from a friend."

"My dear viscount," said Monte Cristo gravely, "you must
have seen before to-day that at all times and in all places I
have been at your disposal, but the service which you have
just demanded of me is one which it is out of my power to
render you."

"And do you account me that title?"

"Why?"

"Certainly I do."

"Perhaps you may know at some future period, and in the
mean time I request you to excuse my declining to put you
in possession of my reasons."

"Yes, I own it."
"Are you quite impervious to good advice?"

"Well, then, before going to Beauchamp with your witnesses,
seek further information on the subject."
"From whom?"
"From Haidee."
"Why, what can be the use of mixing a woman up in the
affair? -- what can she do in it?"

"Well, I will have Franz and Chateau-Renaud; they will be
the very men for it."
"Do so, then."
"But if I do fight, you will surely not object to giving me a
lesson or two in shooting and fencing?"

"She can declare to you, for example, that your father had no
hand whatever in the defeat and death of the vizier; or if by "That, too, is impossible."
chance he had, indeed, the misfortune to" -"What a singular being you are! -- you will not interfere in
"I have told you, my dear count, that I would not for one anything."
moment admit of such a proposition."
"You are right -- that is the principle on which I wish to act."
"You reject this means of information, then?"
328

"We will say no more about it, then. Good-by, count."

Morcerf took his hat, and left the room. He found his
carriage at the door, and doing his utmost to restrain his
anger he went at once to find Beauchamp, who was in his
office. It was a gloomy, dusty-looking apartment, such as
journalists' offices have always been from time immemorial.
The servant announced M. Albert de Morcerf. Beauchamp
repeated the name to himself, as though he could scarcely
believe that he had heard aright, and then gave orders for
him to be admitted. Albert entered. Beauchamp uttered an
exclamation of surprise on seeing his friend leap over and
trample under foot all the newspapers which were strewed
about the room. "This way, this way, my dear Albert!" said
he, holding out his hand to the young man. "Are you out of
your senses, or do you come peaceably to take breakfast with
me? Try and find a seat -- there is one by that geranium,
which is the only thing in the room to remind me that there
are other leaves in the world besides leaves of paper."

yesterday contradicted. You have known me long enough,"
continued Albert, biting his lips convulsively, for he saw that
Beauchamp's anger was beginning to rise, -- "you have been
my friend, and therefore sufficiently intimate with me to be
aware that I am likely to maintain my resolution on this
point."
"If I have been your friend, Morcerf, your present manner of
speaking would almost lead me to forget that I ever bore that
title. But wait a moment, do not let us get angry, or at least
not yet. You are irritated and vexed -- tell me how this
Fernand is related to you?"
"He is merely my father," said Albert -- "M. Fernand
Mondego, Count of Morcerf, an old soldier who has fought
in twenty battles and whose honorable scars they would
denounce as badges of disgrace."

"Is it your father?" said Beauchamp; "that is quite another
"Beauchamp," said Albert, "it is of your journal that I come to thing. Then can well understand your indignation, my dear
Albert. I will look at it again;" and he read the paragraph for
speak."
the third time, laying a stress on each word as he proceeded.
"Indeed? What do you wish to say about it?"
"But the paper nowhere identifies this Fernand with your
"I desire that a statement contained in it should be rectified." father."
"To what do you refer? But pray sit down."

"No; but the connection will be seen by others, and therefore
I will have the article contradicted." At the words "I will,"
"Thank you," said Albert, with a cold and formal bow.
Beauchamp steadily raised his eyes to Albert's countenance,
"Will you now have the kindness to explain the nature of the and then as gradually lowering them, he remained
statement which has displeased you?"
thoughtful for a few moments. "You will retract this
"An announcement has been made which implicates the assertion, will you not, Beauchamp?" said Albert with
increased though stifled anger.
honor of a member of my family."
"What is it?" said Beauchamp, much surprised; "surely you "Yes," replied Beauchamp.
must be mistaken."
"Immediately?" said Albert.
"The story sent you from Yanina."

"When I am convinced that the statement is false."

"Yanina?"

"What?"

"Yes; really you appear to be totally ignorant of the cause "The thing is worth looking into, and I will take pains to
which brings me here."
investigate the matter thoroughly."
"Such is really the case, I assure you, upon my honor!
Baptiste, give me yesterday's paper," cried Beauchamp.

"But what is there to investigate, sir?" said Albert, enraged
beyond measure at Beauchamp's last remark. "If you do not
believe that it is my father, say so immediately; and if, on the
"Here, I have brought mine with me," replied Albert.
contrary, you believe it to be him, state your reasons for
Beauchamp took the paper, and read the article to which doing so." Beauchamp looked at Albert with the smile which
Albert pointed in an undertone. "You see it is a serious was so peculiar to him, and which in its numerous
annoyance," said Morcerf, when Beauchamp had finished modifications served to express every varied emotion of his
the perusal of the paragraph. "Is the officer referred to a mind. "Sir," replied he, "if you came to me with the idea of
relation of yours, then?" demanded the journalist.
demanding satisfaction, you should have gone at once to the
point, and not have entertained me with the idle
"Yes," said Albert, blushing.
conversation to which I have been patiently listening for the
"Well, what do you wish me to do for you?" said Beauchamp
last half hour. Am I to put this construction on your visit?"
mildly.
"Yes, if you will not consent to retract that infamous
"My dear Beauchamp, I wish you to contradict this
calumny."
statement." Beauchamp looked at Albert with a benevolent
"Wait a moment -- no threats, if you please, M. Fernand
expression.
Mondego, Vicomte de Morcerf; I never allow them from my
"Come," said he, "this matter will want a good deal of talking
enemies, and therefore shall not put up with them from my
over; a retractation is always a serious thing, you know. Sit
friends. You insist on my contradicting the article relating to
down, and I will read it again." Albert resumed his seat, and
General Fernand, an article with which, I assure you on my
Beauchamp read, with more attention than at first, the lines
word of honor, I had nothing whatever to do?"
denounced by his friend. "Well," said Albert in a determined
tone, "you see that your paper his insulted a member of my "Yes, I insist on it," said Albert, whose mind was beginning
to get bewildered with the excitement of his feelings.
family, and I insist on a retractation being made."
"You insist?"
"Yes, I insist."
"Permit me to remind you that you are not in the Chamber,
my dear Viscount."
"Nor do I wish to be there," replied the young man, rising. "I
repeat that I am determined to have the announcement of

"And if I refuse to retract, you wish to fight, do you?" said
Beauchamp in a calm tone.
"Yes," replied Albert, raising his voice.
"Well," said Beauchamp, "here is my answer, my dear sir.
The article was not inserted by me -- I was not even aware of
it; but you have, by the step you have taken, called my
attention to the paragraph in question, and it will remain
329


CHAPTER 78


WE HEAR FROM YANINA

until it shall be either contradicted or confirmed by some one
who has a right to do so."
"Sir," said Albert, rising, "I will do myself the honor of
sending my seconds to you, and you will be kind enough to
arrange with them the place of meeting and the weapons."
"Certainly, my dear sir."
"And this evening, if you please, or to-morrow at the latest,
we will meet."
"No, no, I will be on the ground at the proper time; but in my
opinion (and I have a right to dictate the preliminaries, as it
is I who have received the provocation) -- in my opinion the
time ought not to be yet. I know you to be well skilled in the
management of the sword, while I am only moderately so; I
know, too, that you are a good marksman -- there we are
about equal. I know that a duel between us two would be a
serious affair, because you are brave, and I am brave also. I
do not therefore wish either to kill you, or to be killed myself
without a cause. Now, I am going to put a question to you,
and one very much to the purpose too. Do you insist on this
retractation so far as to kill me if I do not make it, although I
have repeated more than once, and affirmed on my honor,
that I was ignorant of the thing with which you charge me,
and although I still declare that it is impossible for any one
but you to recognize the Count of Morcerf under the name of
Fernand?"
"I maintain my original resolution."
"Very well, my dear sir; then I consent to cut throats with
you. But I require three weeks' preparation; at the end of that
time I shall come and say to you, `The assertion is false, and I
retract it,' or `The assertion is true,' when I shall immediately
draw the sword from its sheath, or the pistols from the case,
whichever you please."
"Three weeks!" cried Albert; "they will pass as slowly as

330

three centuries when I am all the time suffering dishonor."
"Had you continued to remain on amicable terms with me, I
should have said, `Patience, my friend;' but you have
constituted yourself my enemy, therefore I say, `What does
that signify to me, sir?'"
"Well, let it be three weeks then," said Morcerf; "but
remember, at the expiration of that time no delay or
subterfuge will justify you in" -"M. Albert de Morcerf," said Beauchamp, rising in his turn, "I
cannot throw you out of window for three weeks -- that is to
say, for twenty-four days to come -- nor have you any right
to split my skull open till that time has elapsed. To-day is the
29th of August; the 21st of September will, therefore, be the
conclusion of the term agreed on, and till that time arrives -and it is the advice of a gentleman which I am about to give
you -- till then we will refrain from growling and barking
like two dogs chained within sight of each other." When he
had concluded his speech, Beauchamp bowed coldly to
Albert, turned his back upon him, and went to the
press-room.
Albert vented his anger on a pile of newspapers, which he
sent flying all over the office by switching them violently
with his stick; after which ebullition he departed -- not,
however, without walking several times to the door of the
press-room, as if he had half a mind to enter. While Albert
was lashing the front of his carriage in the same manner that
he had the newspapers which were the innocent agents of
his discomfiture, as he was crossing the barrier he perceived
Morrel, who was walking with a quick step and a bright eye.
He was passing the Chinese Baths, and appeared to have
come from the direction of the Porte Saint-Martin, and to be
going towards the Madeleine. "Ah," said Morcerf, "there
goes a happy man!" And it so happened Albert was not
mistaken in his opinion.


Chapter 79

The Lemonade

M

orrel was, in fact, very happy. M. Noirtier had just sent
for him, and he was in such haste to know the reason
of his doing so that he had not stopped to take a cab, placing
infinitely more dependence on his own two legs than on the
four legs of a cab-horse. He had therefore set off at a furious
rate from the Rue Meslay, and was hastening with rapid
strides in the direction of the Faubourg Saint-Honore. Morrel
advanced with a firm, manly tread, and poor Barrois
followed him as he best might. Morrel was only thirty-one,
Barrois was sixty years of age; Morrel was deeply in love,
and Barrois was dying with heat and exertion. These two
men, thus opposed in age and interests, resembled two parts
of a triangle, presenting the extremes of separation, yet
nevertheless possessing their point of union. This point of
union was Noirtier, and it was he who had just sent for
Morrel, with the request that the latter would lose no time in
coming to him -- a command which Morrel obeyed to the
letter, to the great discomfiture of Barrois. On arriving at the
house, Morrel was not even out of breath, for love lends
wings to our desires; but Barrois, who had long forgotten
what it was to love, was sorely fatigued by the expedition he
had been constrained to use.
The old servant introduced Morrel by a private entrance,
closed the door of the study, and soon the rustling of a dress
announced the arrival of Valentine. She looked marvellously
beautiful in her deep mourning dress, and Morrel
experienced such intense delight in gazing upon her that he
felt as if he could almost have dispensed with the
conversation of her grandfather. But the easy-chair of the old
man was heard rolling along the floor, and he soon made his
appearance in the room. Noirtier acknowledged by a look of
extreme kindness and benevolence the thanks which Morrel
lavished on him for his timely intervention on behalf of
Valentine and himself -- an intervention which had saved
them from despair. Morrel then cast on the invalid an
interrogative look as to the new favor which he designed to
bestow on him. Valentine was sitting at a little distance from
them, timidly awaiting the moment when she should be
obliged to speak. Noirtier fixed his eyes on her. "Am I to say
what you told me?" asked Valentine. Noirtier made a sign
that she was to do so.

consent to this plan or his refusal; in the first case, I shall
leave directly, and in the second, I shall wait till I am of age,
which will be in about ten months. Then I shall be free, I
shall have an independent fortune, and" -"And what?" demanded Morrel.
"And with my grandfather's consent I shall fulfil the promise
which I have made you." Valentine pronounced these last
few words in such a low tone, that nothing but Morrel's
intense interest in what she was saying could have enabled
him to hear them. "Have I not explained your wishes,
grandpapa?" said Valentine, addressing Noirtier. "Yes,"
looked the old man. -- "Once under my grandfather's roof, M.
Morrel can visit me in the presence of my good and worthy
protector, if we still feel that the union we contemplated will
be likely to insure our future comfort and happiness; in that
case I shall expect M. Morrel to come and claim me at my
own hands. But, alas, I have heard it said that hearts
inflamed by obstacles to their desire grew cold in time of
security; I trust we shall never find it so in our experience!"
"Oh," cried Morrel, almost tempted to throw himself on his
knees before Noirtier and Valentine, and to adore them as
two superior beings, "what have I ever done in my life to
merit such unbounded happiness?"
"Until that time," continued the young girl in a calm and
self-possessed tone of voice, "we will conform to
circumstances, and be guided by the wishes of our friends,
so long as those wishes do not tend finally to separate us; in
a word, and I repeat it, because it expresses all I wish to
convey, -- we will wait."
"And I swear to make all the sacrifices which this word
imposes, sir," said Morrel, "not only with resignation, but
with cheerfulness."
"Therefore," continued Valentine, looking playfully at
Maximilian, "no more inconsiderate actions -- no more rash
projects; for you surely would not wish to compromise one
who from this day regards herself as destined, honorably
and happily, to bear your name?"

Morrel looked obedience to her commands. Noirtier
regarded the lovers with a look of ineffable tenderness,
"Monsieur Morrel," said Valentine to the young man, who while Barrois, who had remained in the room in the
was regarding her with the most intense interest, "my character of a man privileged to know everything that
grandfather, M. Noirtier, had a thousand things to say, passed, smiled on the youthful couple as he wiped the
which he told me three days ago; and now, he has sent for perspiration from his bald forehead. "How hot you look, my
you, that I may repeat them to you. I will repeat them, then; good Barrois," said Valentine.
and since he has chosen me as his interpreter, I will be
"Ah, I have been running very fast, mademoiselle, but I must
faithful to the trust, and will not alter a word of his
do M. Morrel the justice to say that he ran still faster."
intentions."
Noirtier directed their attention to a waiter, on which was
"Oh, I am listening with the greatest impatience," replied the placed a decanter containing lemonade and a glass. The
young man; "speak, I beg of you." Valentine cast down her decanter was nearly full, with the exception of a little, which
eyes; this was a good omen for Morrel, for he knew that had been already drunk by M. Noirtier.
nothing but happiness could have the power of thus
"Come, Barrois," said the young girl, "take some of this
overcoming Valentine. "My grandfather intends leaving this
lemonade; I see you are coveting a good draught of it."
house," said she, "and Barrois is looking out suitable
"The fact is, mademoiselle," said Barrois, "I am dying with
apartments for him in another."
thirst, and since you are so kind as to offer it me, I cannot say
"But you, Mademoiselle de Villefort, -- you, who are
I should at all object to drinking your health in a glass of it."
necessary to M. Noirtier's happiness" -"Take some, then, and come back immediately." Barrois took
"I?" interrupted Valentine; "I shall not leave my grandfather,
away the waiter, and hardly was he outside the door, which
-- that is an understood thing between us. My apartment will
in his haste he forgot to shut, than they saw him throw back
be close to his. Now, M. de Villefort must either give his
331


CHAPTER 79


THE LEMONADE

his head and empty to the very dregs the glass which
Valentine had filled. Valentine and Morrel were exchanging
their adieux in the presence of Noirtier when a ring was
heard at the door-bell. It was the signal of a visit. Valentine
looked at her watch.
"It is past noon," said she, "and to-day is Saturday; I dare say
it is the doctor, grandpapa." Noirtier looked his conviction
that she was right in her supposition. "He will come in here,
and M. Morrel had better go, -- do you not think so,
grandpapa?"

Villefort seemed stupefied with astonishment, and remained
gazing intently on the scene before him without uttering a
word. He had not seen Morrel. After a moment of dumb
contemplation, during which his face became pale and his
hair seemed to stand on end, he sprang towards the door,
crying out, "Doctor, doctor! come instantly, pray come!"
"Madame, madame!" cried Valentine, calling her step-mother,
and running up-stairs to meet her; "come quick, quick! -- and
bring your bottle of smelling-salts with you."

"Yes," signed the old man.

"What is the matter?" said Madame de Villefort in a harsh
and constrained tone.

"Barrois," cried Valentine, "Barrois!"

"Oh, come, come!"

"I am coming, mademoiselle," replied he. "Barrois will open
the door for you," said Valentine, addressing Morrel. "And
now remember one thing, Monsieur Officer, that my
grandfather commands you not to take any rash or
ill-advised step which would be likely to compromise our
happiness."

"But where is the doctor?" exclaimed Villefort; "where is he?"
Madame de Villefort now deliberately descended the
staircase. In one hand she held her handkerchief, with which
she appeared to be wiping her face, and in the other a bottle
of English smelling-salts. Her first look on entering the room
was at Noirtier, whose face, independent of the emotion
which such a scene could not fail of producing, proclaimed
him to be in possession of his usual health; her second glance
was at the dying man. She turned pale, and her eye passed
quickly from the servant and rested on the master.

"I promised him to wait," replied Morrel; "and I will wait."
At this moment Barrois entered. "Who rang?" asked
Valentine.
"Doctor d'Avrigny," said Barrois, staggering as if he would
fall.
"What is the matter, Barrois?" said Valentine. The old man
did not answer, but looked at his master with wild staring
eyes, while with his cramped hand he grasped a piece of
furniture to enable him to stand upright. "He is going to fall!"
cried Morrel. The rigors which had attacked Barrois
gradually increased, the features of the face became quite
altered, and the convulsive movement of the muscles
appeared to indicate the approach of a most serious nervous
disorder. Noirtier, seeing Barrois in this pitiable condition,
showed by his looks all the various emotions of sorrow and
sympathy which can animate the heart of man. Barrois made
some steps towards his master.
"Ah, sir," said he, "tell me what is the matter with me. I am
suffering -- I cannot see. A thousand fiery darts are piercing
my brain. Ah, don't touch me, pray don't." By this time his
haggard eyes had the appearance of being ready to start
from their sockets; his head fell back, and the lower
extremities of the body began to stiffen. Valentine uttered a
cry of horror; Morrel took her in his arms, as if to defend her
from some unknown danger. "M. d'Avrigny, M. d'Avrigny,"
cried she, in a stifled voice. "Help, help!" Barrois turned
round and with a great effort stumbled a few steps, then fell
at the feet of Noirtier, and resting his hand on the knee of the
invalid, exclaimed, "My master, my good master!" At this
moment M. de Villefort, attracted by the noise, appeared on
the threshold. Morrel relaxed his hold of Valentine, and
retreating to a distant corner of the room remained half
hidden behind a curtain. Pale as if he had been gazing on a
serpent, he fixed his terrified eye on the agonized sufferer.
Noirtier, burning with impatience and terror, was in despair
at his utter inability to help his old domestic, whom he
regarded more in the light of a friend than a servant. One
might by the fearful swelling of the veins of his forehead and
the contraction of the muscles round the eye, trace the
terrible conflict which was going on between the living
energetic mind and the inanimate and helpless body. Barrois,
his features convulsed, his eyes suffused with blood, and his
head thrown back, was lying at full length, beating the floor
with his hands, while his legs had become so stiff, that they
looked as if they would break rather than bend. A slight
appearance of foam was visible around the mouth, and he
breathed painfully, and with extreme difficulty.
332

"In the name of heaven, madame," said Villefort, "where is
the doctor? He was with you just now. You see this is a fit of
apoplexy, and he might be saved if he could but be bled!"
"Has he eaten anything lately?" asked Madame de Villefort,
eluding her husband's question. "Madame," replied
Valentine, "he has not even breakfasted. He has been
running very fast on an errand with which my grandfather
charged him, and when he returned, took nothing but a glass
of lemonade."
"Ah," said Madame de Villefort, "why did he not take wine?
Lemonade was a very bad thing for him."
"Grandpapa's bottle of lemonade was standing just by his
side; poor Barrois was very thirsty, and was thankful to
drink anything he could find." Madame de Villefort started.
Noirtier looked at her with a glance of the most profound
scrutiny. "He has such a short neck," said she. "Madame,"
said Villefort, "I ask where is M. d'Avrigny? In God's name
answer me!"
"He is with Edward, who is not quite well," replied Madame
de Villefort, no longer being able to avoid answering.
Villefort rushed up-stairs to fetch him. "Take this," said
Madame de Villefort, giving her smelling-bottle to Valentine.
"They will, no doubt, bleed him; therefore I will retire, for I
cannot endure the sight of blood;" and she followed her
husband up-stairs. Morrel now emerged from his
hiding-place, where he had remained quite unperceived, so
great had been the general confusion. "Go away as quick as
you can, Maximilian," said Valentine, "and stay till I send for
you. Go."
Morrel looked towards Noirtier for permission to retire. The
old man, who had preserved all his usual coolness, made a
sign to him to do so. The young man pressed Valentine's
hand to his lips, and then left the house by a back staircase.
At the same moment that he quitted the room, Villefort and
the doctor entered by an opposite door. Barrois was now
showing signs of returning consciousness. The crisis seemed
past, a low moaning was heard, and he raised himself on one
knee. D'Avrigny and Villefort laid him on a couch. "What do
you prescribe, doctor?" demanded Villefort. "Give me some
water and ether. You have some in the house, have you not?"
"Yes."
"Send for some oil of turpentine and tartar emetic."

Villefort immediately despatched a messenger. "And now let
every one retire."

ascending the steps which led to her room. "Is this the
decanter you spoke of?" asked d'Avrigny.

"Must I go too?" asked Valentine timidly.

"Yes, doctor."

"Yes, mademoiselle, you especially," replied the doctor
abruptly.

"Is this the same lemonade of which you partook?"

Valentine looked at M. d'Avrigny with astonishment, kissed
her grandfather on the forehead, and left the room. The
doctor closed the door after her with a gloomy air. "Look,
look, doctor," said Villefort, "he is quite coming round again;
I really do not think, after all, it is anything of consequence."
M. d'Avrigny answered by a melancholy smile. "How do
you feel, Barrois?" asked he. "A little better, sir."
"Will you drink some of this ether and water?"

"I believe so."
"What did it taste like?"
"It had a bitter taste."
The doctor poured some drops of the lemonade into the
palm of his hand, put his lips to it, and after having rinsed
his mouth as a man does when he is tasting wine, he spat the
liquor into the fireplace.

"I will try; but don't touch me."

"It is no doubt the same," said he. "Did you drink some too,
M. Noirtier?"

"Why not?"

"Yes."

"Because I feel that if you were only to touch me with the tip
of your finger the fit would return."

"And did you also discover a bitter taste?"

"Drink."

"Oh, doctor," cried Barrois, "the fit is coming on again. Oh,
do something for me." The doctor flew to his patient. "That
emetic, Villefort -- see if it is coming." Villefort sprang into
the passage, exclaiming, "The emetic! the emetic! -- is it come
yet?" No one answered. The most profound terror reigned
throughout the house. "If I had anything by means of which
I could inflate the lungs," said d'Avrigny, looking around
him, "perhaps I might prevent suffocation. But there is
nothing which would do -- nothing!" "Oh, sir," cried Barrois,
"are you going to let me die without help? Oh, I am dying!
Oh, save me!"

Barrois took the glass, and, raising it to his purple lips, took
about half of the liquid offered him. "Where do you suffer?"
asked the doctor.
"Everywhere. I feel cramps over my whole body."
"Do you find any dazzling sensation before the eyes?"
"Yes."
"Any noise in the ears?"
"Frightful."

"Yes."

"No drowsiness?"

"A pen, a pen!" said the doctor. There was one lying on the
table; he endeavored to introduce it into the mouth of the
patient, who, in the midst of his convulsions, was making
vain attempts to vomit; but the jaws were so clinched that
the pen could not pass them. This second attack was much
more violent than the first, and he had slipped from the
couch to the ground, where he was writhing in agony. The
doctor left him in this paroxysm, knowing that he could do
nothing to alleviate it, and, going up to Noirtier, said
abruptly, "How do you find yourself? -- well?"

"None."

"Yes."

"What have you eaten to-day?"

"Have you any weight on the chest; or does your stomach
feel light and comfortable -- eh?"

"When did you first feel that?"
"Just now."
"Suddenly?"
"Yes, like a clap of thunder."
"Did you feel nothing of it yesterday or the day before?"
"Nothing."

"I have eaten nothing; I only drank a glass of my master's
lemonade -- that's all;" and Barrois turned towards Noirtier,
who, immovably fixed in his arm-chair, was contemplating
this terrible scene without allowing a word or a movement
to escape him.
"Where is this lemonade?" asked the doctor eagerly.
"Down-stairs in the decanter."
"Whereabouts downstairs?"
"In the kitchen."
"Shall I go and fetch it, doctor?" inquired Villefort.
"No, stay here and try to make Barrois drink the rest of this
glass of ether and water. I will go myself and fetch the
lemonade." D'Avrigny bounded towards the door, flew
down the back staircase, and almost knocked down Madame
de Villefort, in his haste, who was herself going down to the
kitchen. She cried out, but d'Avrigny paid no attention to her;
possessed with but one idea, he cleared the last four steps
with a bound, and rushed into the kitchen, where he saw the
decanter about three parts empty still standing on the waiter,
where it had been left. He darted upon it as an eagle would
seize upon its prey. Panting with loss of breath, he returned
to the room he had just left. Madame de Villefort was slowly

"Yes."
"Then you feel pretty much as you generally do after you
have had the dose which I am accustomed to give you every
Sunday?"
"Yes."
"Did Barrois make your lemonade?"
"Yes."
"Was it you who asked him to drink some of it?"
"No."
"Was it M. de Villefort?"
"No."
"Madame?"
"No."
"It was your granddaughter, then, was it not?"
"Yes." A groan from Barrois, accompanied by a yawn which
seemed to crack the very jawbones, attracted the attention of
M. d'Avrigny; he left M. Noirtier, and returned to the sick
man. "Barrois," said the doctor, "can you speak?" Barrois
333


CHAPTER 79


THE LEMONADE

muttered a few unintelligible words. "Try and make an effort Villefort drew back a few steps, and, clasping his hands,
to do so, my good man." said d'Avrigny. Barrois reopened exclaimed, with real amazement and sympathy, "Dead? -his bloodshot eyes. "Who made the lemonade?"
and so soon too!"
"I did."
"Did you bring it to your master directly it was made?"
"No."
"You left it somewhere, then, in the meantime?"
"Yes; I left it in the pantry, because I was called away."

"Yes, it is very soon," said the doctor, looking at the corpse
before him; "but that ought not to astonish you; Monsieur
and Madame de Saint-Meran died as soon. People die very
suddenly in your house, M. de Villefort."
"What?" cried the magistrate, with an accent of horror and
consternation, "are you still harping on that terrible idea?"

"Still, sir; and I shall always do so," replied d'Avrigny, "for it
has never for one instant ceased to retain possession of my
"Mademoiselle Valentine." D'Avrigny struck his forehead mind; and that you may be quite sure I am not mistaken this
with his hand. "Gracious heaven," exclaimed he. "Doctor, time, listen well to what I am going to say, M. de Villefort."
doctor!" cried Barrois, who felt another fit coming.
The magistrate trembled convulsively. "There is a poison
which destroys life almost without leaving any perceptible
"Will they never bring that emetic?" asked the doctor.
traces. I know it well; I have studied it in all its forms and in
"Here is a glass with one already prepared," said Villefort,
the effects which it produces. I recognized the presence of
entering the room.
this poison in the case of poor Barrois as well as in that of
"Who prepared it?"
Madame de Saint-Meran. There is a way of detecting its
presence. It restores the blue color of litmus-paper reddened
"The chemist who came here with me."
by an acid, and it turns syrup of violets green. We have no
"Drink it," said the doctor to Barrois. "Impossible, doctor; it is litmus-paper, but, see, here they come with the syrup of
too late; my throat is closing up. I am choking! Oh, my heart! violets."
Ah, my head! -- Oh, what agony! -- Shall I suffer like this
The doctor was right; steps were heard in the passage. M.
long?"
d'Avrigny opened the door, and took from the hands of the
"No, no, friend," replied the doctor, "you will soon cease to chambermaid a cup which contained two or three spoonfuls
suffer."
of the syrup, he then carefully closed the door. "Look," said
"Ah, I understand you," said the unhappy man. "My God, he to the procureur, whose heart beat so loudly that it might
have mercy upon me!" and, uttering a fearful cry, Barrois fell almost be heard, "here is in this cup some syrup of violets,
back as if he had been struck by lightning. D'Avrigny put his and this decanter contains the remainder of the lemonade of
which M. Noirtier and Barrois partook. If the lemonade be
hand to his heart, and placed a glass before his lips.
pure and inoffensive, the syrup will retain its color; if, on the
"Well?" said Villefort. "Go to the kitchen and get me some
contrary, the lemonade be drugged with poison, the syrup
syrup of violets." Villefort went immediately. "Do not be
will become green. Look closely!"
alarmed, M. Noirtier," said d'Avrigny; "I am going to take
my patient into the next room to bleed him; this sort of The doctor then slowly poured some drops of the lemonade
from the decanter into the cup, and in an instant a light
attack is very frightful to witness."
cloudy sediment began to form at the bottom of the cup; this
And taking Barrois under the arms, he dragged him into an
sediment first took a blue shade, then from the color of
adjoining room; but almost immediately he returned to fetch
sapphire it passed to that of opal, and from opal to emerald.
the lemonade. Noirtier closed lids right eye. "You want
Arrived at this last hue, it changed no more. The result of the
Valentine, do you not? I will tell them to send her to you."
experiment left no doubt whatever on the mind.
Villefort returned, and d'Avrigny met him in the passage.
"Well, how is he now?" asked he. "Come in here," said "The unfortunate Barrois has been poisoned," said d'Avrigny,
d'Avrigny, and he took him into the chamber where the sick "and I will maintain this assertion before God and man."
Villefort said nothing, but he clasped his hands, opened his
man lay. "Is he still in a fit?" said the procureur.
haggard eyes, and, overcome with his emotion, sank into a
"He is dead."
chair.
"Who brought it into this room, then?"

334


Chapter 80

M

The Accusation

. D'Avrigny soon restored the magistrate to "How? M. Noirtier?"
consciousness, who had looked like a second corpse in
"Yes; think you it was the poor servant's life was coveted?
that chamber of death. "Oh, death is in my house!" cried
No, no; like Shakespeare's `Polonius,' he died for another. It
Villefort.
was Noirtier the lemonade was intended for -- it is Noirtier,
"Say, rather, crime!" replied the doctor.
logically speaking, who drank it. The other drank it only by
accident, and, although Barrois is dead, it was Noirtier
"M. d'Avrigny," cried Villefort, "I cannot tell you all I feel at
whose death was wished for."
this moment, -- terror, grief, madness."
"But why did it not kill my father?"
"Yes," said M. d'Avrigny, with an imposing calmness, "but I
think it is now time to act. I think it is time to stop this "I told you one evening in the garden after Madame de
torrent of mortality. I can no longer bear to be in possession Saint-Meran's death -- because his system is accustomed to
of these secrets without the hope of seeing the victims and that very poison, and the dose was trifling to him, which
society generally revenged." Villefort cast a gloomy look would be fatal to another; because no one knows, not even
around him. "In my house," murmured he, "in my house!"
the assassin, that, for the last twelve months, I have given M.
Noirtier brucine for his paralytic affection, while the assassin
"Come, magistrate," said M. d'Avrigny, "show yourself a
is not ignorant, for he has proved that brucine is a violent
man; as an interpreter of the law, do honor to your
poison."
profession by sacrificing your selfish interests to it."
"Oh, have pity -- have pity!" murmured Villefort, wringing
"You make me shudder, doctor. Do you talk of a sacrifice?"
his hands.
"I do."
"Follow the culprit's steps; he first kills M. de Saint-Meran" -"Do you then suspect any one?"
"O doctor!"
"I suspect no one; death raps at your door -- it enters -- it
"I would swear to it; what I heard of his symptoms agrees
goes, not blindfolded, but circumspectly, from room to room.
too well with what I have seen in the other cases." Villefort
Well, I follow its course, I track its passage; I adopt the
ceased to contend; he only groaned. "He first kills M. de
wisdom of the ancients, and feel my way, for my friendship
Saint-Meran," repeated the doctor, "then Madame de
for your family and my respect for you are as a twofold
Saint-Meran, -- a double fortune to inherit." Villefort wiped
bandage over my eyes; well" -the perspiration from his forehead. "Listen attentively."
"Oh, speak, speak, doctor; I shall have courage."
"Alas," stammered Villefort, "I do not lose a single word."
"Well, sir, you have in your establishment, or in your family,
"M. Noirtier," resumed M. d'Avrigny in the same pitiless
perhaps, one of the frightful monstrosities of which each
tone, -- "M. Noirtier had once made a will against you -century produces only one. Locusta and Agrippina, living at
against your family -- in favor of the poor, in fact; M.
the same time, were an exception, and proved the
Noirtier is spared, because nothing is expected from him.
determination of providence to effect the entire ruin of the
But he has no sooner destroyed his first will and made a
Roman empire, sullied by so many crimes. Brunehilde and
second, than, for fear he should make a third, he is struck
Fredegonde were the results of the painful struggle of
down. The will was made the day before yesterday, I believe;
civilization in its infancy, when man was learning to control
you see there has been no time lost."
mind, were it even by an emissary from the realms of
darkness. All these women had been, or were, beautiful. The "Oh, mercy, M. d'Avrigny!"
same flower of innocence had flourished, or was still
"No mercy, sir! The physician has a sacred mission on earth;
flourishing, on their brow, that is seen on the brow of the
and to fulfil it he begins at the source of life, and goes down
culprit in your house." Villefort shrieked, clasped his hands,
to the mysterious darkness of the tomb. When crime has
and looked at the doctor with a supplicating air. But the
been committed, and God, doubtless in anger, turns away
latter went on without pity: -his face, it is for the physician to bring the culprit to justice."
"`Seek whom the crime will profit,' says an axiom of
"Have mercy on my child, sir," murmured Villefort.
jurisprudence."
"You see it is yourself who have first named her -- you, her
"Doctor," cried Villefort, "alas, doctor, how often has man's
father."
justice been deceived by those fatal words. I know not why,
"Have pity on Valentine! Listen -- it is impossible! I would as
but I feel that this crime" -willingly accuse myself! Valentine, whose heart is pure as a
"You acknowledge, then, the existence of the crime?"
diamond or a lily."
"Yes, I see too plainly that it does exist. But it seems that it is
"No pity, procureur; the crime is fragrant. Mademoiselle
intended to affect me personally. I fear an attack myself, after
herself packed all the medicines which were sent to M. de
all these disasters."
Saint-Meran; and M. de Saint-Meran is dead. Mademoiselle
"Oh, man," murmured d'Avrigny, "the most selfish of all de Villefort prepared all the cooling draughts which
animals, the most personal of all creatures, who believes the Madame de Saint-Meran took, and Madame de Saint-Meran
earth turns, the sun shines, and death strikes for him alone, is dead. Mademoiselle de Villefort took from the hands of
-- an ant cursing God from the top of a blade of grass! And Barrois, who was sent out, the lemonade which M. Noirtier
have those who have lost their lives lost nothing? -- M. de had every morning, and he has escaped by a miracle.
Saint-Meran, Madame de Saint-Meran, M. Noirtier" -Mademoiselle de Villefort is the culprit -- she is the poisoner!
To you, as the king's attorney, I denounce Mademoiselle
335


CHAPTER 80


THE ACCUSATION

de Villefort, do your duty."

Villefort looked at him as if he had doubted his words.
"Only," continued M. d'Avrigny, with a slow and solemn
"Doctor, I resist no longer -- I can no longer defend myself -tone, "if any one falls ill in your house, if you feel yourself
I believe you; but, for pity's sake, spare my life, my honor!"
attacked, do not send for me, for I will come no more. I will
"M. de Villefort," replied the doctor, with increased consent to share this dreadful secret with you, but I will not
vehemence, "there are occasions when I dispense with all allow shame and remorse to grow and increase in my
foolish human circumspection. If your daughter had conscience, as crime and misery will in your house."
committed only one crime, and I saw her meditating another,
"Then you abandon me, doctor?"
I would say `Warn her, punish her, let her pass the
remainder of her life in a convent, weeping and praying.' If "Yes, for I can follow you no farther, and I only stop at the
she had committed two crimes, I would say, `Here, M. de foot of the scaffold. Some further discovery will be made,
Villefort, is a poison that the prisoner is not acquainted with, which will bring this dreadful tragedy to a close. Adieu."
-- one that has no known antidote, quick as thought, rapid as
"I entreat you, doctor!"
lightning, mortal as the thunderbolt; give her that poison,
recommending her soul to God, and save your honor and "All the horrors that disturb my thoughts make your house
your life, for it is yours she aims at; and I can picture her odious and fatal. Adieu, sir."
approaching your pillow with her hypocritical smiles and "One word -- one single word more, doctor! You go, leaving
her sweet exhortations. Woe to you, M. de Villefort, if you me in all the horror of my situation, after increasing it by
do not strike first!' This is what I would say had she only what you have revealed to me. But what will be reported of
killed two persons but she has seen three deaths, -- has the sudden death of the poor old servant?"
contemplated three murdered persons, -- has knelt by three
corpses! To the scaffold with the poisoner -- to the scaffold! "True," said M. d'Avrigny; "we will return." The doctor went
Do you talk of your honor? Do what I tell you, and out first, followed by M. de Villefort. The terrified servants
were on the stairs and in the passage where the doctor
immortality awaits you!"
would pass. "Sir," said d'Avrigny to Villefort, so loud that all
Villefort fell on his knees. "Listen," said he; "I have not the might hear, "poor Barrois has led too sedentary a life of late;
strength of mind you have, or rather that which you would accustomed formerly to ride on horseback, or in the carriage,
not have, if instead of my daughter Valentine your daughter to the four corners of Europe, the monotonous walk around
Madeleine were concerned." The doctor turned pale. "Doctor, that arm-chair has killed him -- his blood has thickened. He
every son of woman is born to suffer and to die; I am content was stout, had a short, thick neck; he was attacked with
to suffer and to await death."
apoplexy, and I was called in too late. By the way," added he
"Beware," said M. d'Avrigny, "it may come slowly; you will in a low tone, "take care to throw away that cup of syrup of
see it approach after having struck your father, your wife, violets in the ashes."
perhaps your son."
The doctor, without shaking hands with Villefort, without
Villefort, suffocating, pressed the doctor's arm. "Listen,"
cried he; "pity me -- help me! No, my daughter is not guilty.
If you drag us both before a tribunal I will still say, `No, my
daughter is not guilty; -- there is no crime in my house. I will
not acknowledge a crime in my house; for when crime enters
a dwelling, it is like death -- it does not come alone.' Listen.
What does it signify to you if I am murdered? Are you my
friend? Are you a man? Have you a heart? No, you are a
physician! Well, I tell you I will not drag my daughter before
a tribunal, and give her up to the executioner! The bare idea
would kill me -- would drive me like a madman to dig my
heart out with my finger-nails! And if you were mistaken,
doctor -- if it were not my daughter -- if I should come one
day, pale as a spectre, and say to you, `Assassin, you have
killed my child!' -- hold -- if that should happen, although I
am a Christian, M. d'Avrigny, I should kill myself."
"Well," said the doctor, after a moment's silence, "I will wait."

336

adding a word to what he had said, went out, amid the tears
and lamentations of the whole household. The same evening
all Villefort's servants, who had assembled in the kitchen,
and had a long consultation, came to tell Madame de
Villefort that they wished to leave. No entreaty, no
proposition of increased wages, could induce them to remain;
to every argument they replied, "We must go, for death is in
this house." They all left, in spite of prayers and entreaties,
testifying their regret at leaving so good a master and
mistress, and especially Mademoiselle Valentine, so good, so
kind, and so gentle. Villefort looked at Valentine as they said
this. She was in tears, and, strange as it was, in spite of the
emotions he felt at the sight of these tears, he looked also at
Madame de Villefort, and it appeared to him as if a slight
gloomy smile had passed over her thin lips, like a meteor
seen passing inauspiciously between two clouds in a stormy
sky.


Chapter 81

The Room Of The Retired Baker

T

he evening of the day on which the Count of Morcerf
had left Danglars' house with feelings of shame and
anger at the rejection of the projected alliance, M. Andrea
Cavalcanti, with curled hair, mustaches in perfect order, and
white gloves which fitted admirably, had entered the
courtyard of the banker's house in La Chaussee d'Antin. He
had not been more than ten minutes in the drawing-room
before he drew Danglars aside into the recess of a
bow-window, and, after an ingenious preamble, related to
him all his anxieties and cares since his noble father's
departure. He acknowledged the extreme kindness which
had been shown him by the banker's family, in which he had
been received as a son, and where, besides, his warmest
affections had found an object on which to centre in
Mademoiselle Danglars. Danglars listened with the most
profound attention; he had expected this declaration for the
last two or three days, and when at last it came his eyes
glistened as much as they had lowered on listening to
Morcerf. He would not, however, yield immediately to the
young man's request, but made a few conscientious
objections. "Are you not rather young, M. Andrea, to think of
marrying?"

"Which?" asked the young man.

"But," said Danglars, -- who, on his part, did not perceive
how soon the conversation, which was at first disinterested,
was turning to a business transaction, -- "there is, doubtless,
a part of your fortune your father could not refuse you?"

hands as he was on the point of starting, after having left
two hundred francs for Caderousse. He went out chiefly to
avoid this dangerous enemy, and returned as late as possible
in the evening. But scarcely had be stepped out of his
carriage when the porter met him with a parcel in his
337

"That you inherit from your mother."
"Truly, from my mother, Leonora Corsinari."
"How much may it amount to?"
"Indeed, sir," said Andrea, "I assure you I have never given
the subject a thought, but I suppose it must have been at
least two millions." Danglars felt as much overcome with joy
as the miser who finds a lost treasure, or as the shipwrecked
mariner who feels himself on solid ground instead of in the
abyss which he expected would swallow him up.
"Well, sir," said Andrea, bowing to the banker respectfully,
"may I hope?"
"You may not only hope," said Danglars, "but consider it a
settled thing, if no obstacle arises on your part."
"I am, indeed, rejoiced," said Andrea.

"But," said Danglars thoughtfully, "how is it that your patron,
M. de Monte Cristo, did not make his proposal for you?"
Andrea blushed imperceptibly. "I have just left the count,
sir," said he; "he is, doubtless, a delightful man but
"I think not, sir," replied M. Cavalcanti; "in Italy the nobility inconceivably peculiar in his ideas. He esteems me highly.
generally marry young. Life is so uncertain, that we ought to He even told me he had not the slightest doubt that my
father would give me the capital instead of the interest of my
secure happiness while it is within our reach."
property. He has promised to use his influence to obtain it
"Well, sir," said Danglars, "in case your proposals, which do
for me; but he also declared that he never had taken on
me honor, are accepted by my wife and daughter, by whom
himself the responsibility of making proposals for another,
shall the preliminary arrangements be settled? So important
and he never would. I must, however, do him the justice to
a negotiation should, I think, be conducted by the respective
add that he assured me if ever he had regretted the
fathers of the young people."
repugnance he felt to such a step it was on this occasion,
"Sir, my father is a man of great foresight and prudence. because he thought the projected union would be a happy
Thinking that I might wish to settle in France, he left me at and suitable one. Besides, if he will do nothing officially, he
his departure, together with the papers establishing my will answer any questions you propose to him. And now,"
identity, a letter promising, if he approved of my choice, continued he, with one of his most charming smiles, "having
150,000 livres per annum from the day I was married. So far finished talking to the father-in-law, I must address myself
as I can judge, I suppose this to be a quarter of my father's to the banker."
revenue."
"And what may you have to say to him?" said Danglars,
"I," said Danglars, "have always intended giving my laughing in his turn.
daughter 500,000 francs as her dowry; she is, besides, my
"That the day after to-morrow I shall have to draw upon you
sole heiress."
for about four thousand francs; but the count, expecting my
"All would then be easily arranged if the baroness and her bachelor's revenue could not suffice for the coming month's
daughter are willing. We should command an annuity of outlay, has offered me a draft for twenty thousand francs. It
175,000 livres. Supposing, also, I should persuade the bears his signature, as you see, which is all-sufficient."
marquis to give me my capital, which is not likely, but still is
"Bring me a million such as that," said Danglars, "I shall be
possible, we would place these two or three millions in your
well pleased," putting the draft in his pocket. "Fix your own
hands, whose talent might make it realize ten per cent."
hour for to-morrow, and my cashier shall call on you with a
"I never give more than four per cent, and generally only check for eighty thousand francs."
three and a half; but to my son-in-law I would give five, and
"At ten o'clock then, if you please; I should like it early, as I
we would share the profit."
am going into the country to-morrow."
"Very good, father-in-law," said Cavalcanti, yielding to his
"Very well, at ten o'clock;, you are still at the Hotel des
low-born nature, which would escape sometimes through
Princes?"
the aristocratic gloss with which he sought to conceal it.
Correcting himself immediately, he said, "Excuse me, sir; "Yes."
hope alone makes me almost mad, -- what will not reality The following morning, with the banker's usual punctuality,
do?"
the eighty thousand francs were placed in the young man's


CHAPTER 81


THE ROOM OF THE RETIRED BAKER

hand. "Sir," said he, "that man has been here."

inhaled the scent of something cooking which was not
unwelcome to him, hungry as he was; it was that mixture of
"What man?" said Andrea carelessly, apparently forgetting
fat and garlic peculiar to provincial kitchens of an inferior
him whom he but too well recollected.
order, added to that of dried fish, and above all, the pungent
"Him to whom your excellency pays that little annuity."
smell of musk and cloves. These odors escaped from two
"Oh," said Andrea, "my father's old servant. Well, you gave deep dishes which were covered and placed on a stove, and
from a copper pan placed in an old iron pot. In an adjoining
him the two hundred francs I had left for him?"
room Andrea saw also a tolerably clean table prepared for
"Yes, your excellency." Andrea had expressed a wish to be two, two bottles of wine sealed, the one with green, the other
thus addressed. "But," continued the porter, "he would not with yellow, a supply of brandy in a decanter, and a
take them." Andrea turned pale, but as it was dark his pallor measure of fruit in a cabbage-leaf, cleverly arranged on an
was not perceptible. "What? he would not take them?" said earthenware plate.
he with slight emotion.
"What do you think of it, my little fellow?" said Caderousse.
"No, he wished to speak to your excellency; I told him you "Ay, that smells good! You know I used to be a famous cook;
were gone out, and after some dispute he believed me and do you recollect how you used to lick your fingers? You
gave me this letter, which he had brought with him already were among the first who tasted any of my dishes, and I
sealed."
think you relished them tolerably." While speaking,
"Give it me," said Andrea, and he read by the light of his Caderousse went on peeling a fresh supply of onions.
carriage-lamp, -- "You know where I live; I expect you "But," said Andrea, ill-temperedly, "by my faith, if it was
tomorrow morning at nine o'clock."
only to breakfast with you, that you disturbed me, I wish the
Andrea examined it carefully, to ascertain if the letter had
been opened, or if any indiscreet eyes had seen its contents;
but it was so carefully folded, that no one could have read it,
and the seal was perfect. "Very well," said he. "Poor man, he
is a worthy creature." He left the porter to ponder on these
words, not knowing which most to admire, the master or the
servant. "Take out the horses quickly, and come up to me,"
said Andrea to his groom. In two seconds the young man
had reached his room and burnt Caderousse's letter. The
servant entered just as he had finished. "You are about my
height, Pierre," said he.

devil had taken you!"

"I have that honor, your excellency."

"And yet it has not prevented your sending for me to play
me some trick."

"You had a new livery yesterday?"

"My boy," said Caderousse sententiously, "one can talk while
eating. And then, you ungrateful being, you are not pleased
to see an old friend? I am weeping with joy." He was truly
crying, but it would have been difficult to say whether joy or
the onions produced the greatest effect on the lachrymal
glands of the old inn-keeper of the Pont-du-Gard. "Hold
your tongue, hypocrite," said Andrea; "you love me!"
"Yes, I do, or may the devil take me. I know it is a weakness,"
said Caderousse, "but it overpowers me."

"Come," said Caderousse, wiping his large knife on his
apron, "if I did not like you, do you think I should endure
"I have an engagement with a pretty little girl for this the wretched life you lead me? Think for a moment. You
evening, and do not wish to be known; lend me your livery have your servant's clothes on -- you therefore keep a
till to-morrow. I may sleep, perhaps, at an inn." Pierre servant; I have none, and am obliged to prepare my own
obeyed. Five minutes after, Andrea left the hotel, completely meals. You abuse my cookery because you dine at the table
disguised, took a cabriolet, and ordered the driver to take d'hote of the Hotel des Princes, or the Cafe de Paris. Well, I
him to the Cheval Rouge, at Picpus. The next morning he left too could keep a servant; I too could have a tilbury; I too
that inn as he had left the Hotel des Princes, without being could dine where I like; but why do I not? Because I would
noticed, walked down the Faubourg St. Antoine, along the not annoy my little Benedetto. Come, just acknowledge that I
boulevard to Rue Menilmontant, and stopping at the door of could, eh?" This address was accompanied by a look which
the third house on the left looked for some one of whom to was by no means difficult to understand. "Well," said
make inquiry in the porter's absence. "For whom are you Andrea, "admitting your love, why do you want me to
looking, my fine fellow?" asked the fruiteress on the opposite breakfast with you?"
side.
"That I may have the pleasure of seeing you, my little
"Yes, sir."

"Monsieur Pailletin, if you please, my good woman," replied
Andrea.
"A retired baker?" asked the fruiteress.

fellow."
"What is the use of seeing me after we have made all our
arrangements?"

"Eh, dear friend," said Caderousse, "are wills ever made
without codicils? But you first came to breakfast, did you not?
"He lives at the end of the yard, on the left, on the third
Well, sit down, and let us begin with these pilchards, and
story." Andrea went as she directed him, and on the third
this fresh butter; which I have put on some vine-leaves to
floor he found a hare's paw, which, by the hasty ringing of
please you, wicked one. Ah, yes; you look at my room, my
the bell, it was evident he pulled with considerable
four straw chairs, my images, three francs each. But what do
ill-temper. A moment after Caderousse's face appeared at
you expect? This is not the Hotel des Princes."
the grating in the door. "Ah, you are punctual," said he, as he
"Come, you are growing discontented, you are no longer
drew back the door.
happy; you, who only wish to live like a retired baker."
"Confound you and your punctuality!" said Andrea,
Caderousse sighed. "Well, what have you to say? you have
throwing himself into a chair in a manner which implied
seen your dream realized."
that he would rather have flung it at the head of his host.
"I can still say it is a dream; a retired baker, my poor
"Come, come, my little fellow, don't be angry. See, I have
Benedetto, is rich -- he has an annuity."
thought about you -- look at the good breakfast we are going
to have; nothing but what you are fond of." Andrea, indeed, "Well, you have an annuity."
"Exactly."

338

"I have?"

friend Caderousse."

"Yes, since I bring you your two hundred francs."
Caderousse shrugged his shoulders. "It is humiliating," said
he, "thus to receive money given grudgingly, -- an uncertain
supply which may soon fail. You see I am obliged to
economize, in case your prosperity should cease. Well, my
friend, fortune is inconstant, as the chaplain of the regiment
said. I know your prosperity is great, you rascal; you are to
marry the daughter of Danglars."

"There you are beginning again to ramble, to talk again and
again of the past! But what is the use of teasing me with
going all over that again?"

"What? of Danglars?"

"I was going to say, if I were in your place" --

"Yes, to be sure; must I say Baron Danglars? I might as well
say Count Benedetto. He was an old friend of mine and if he
had not so bad a memory he ought to invite me to your
wedding, seeing he came to mine. Yes, yes, to mine; gad, he
was not so proud then, -- he was an under-clerk to the good
M. Morrel. I have dined many times with him and the Count
of Morcerf, so you see I have some high connections and
were I to cultivate them a little, we might meet in the same
drawing-rooms."

"Well."

"Come, your jealousy represents everything to you in the
wrong light."
"That is all very fine, Benedetto mio, but I know what I am
saying. Perhaps I may one day put on my best coat, and
presenting myself at the great gate, introduce myself.
Meanwhile let us sit down and eat." Caderousse set the
example and attacked the breakfast with good appetite,
praising each dish he set before his visitor. The latter seemed
to have resigned himself; he drew the corks, and partook
largely of the fish with the garlic and fat. "Ah, mate," said
Caderousse, "you are getting on better terms with your old
landlord!"

"Ah, you are only one and twenty, and can forget the past; I
am fifty, and am obliged to recollect it. But let us return to
business."
"Yes."

"I would realize" -"How would you realize?"
"I would ask for six months' in advance, under pretence of
being able to purchase a farm, then with my six months I
would decamp."
"Well, well," said Andrea, "that isn't a bad idea."
"My dear friend," said Caderousse, "eat of my bread, and
take my advice; you will be none the worse off, physically or
morally."
"But," said Andrea, "why do you not act on the advice you
gave me? Why do you not realize a six months', a year's
advance even, and retire to Brussels? Instead of living the
retired baker, you might live as a bankrupt, using his
privileges; that would be very good."
"But how the devil would you have me retire on twelve
hundred francs?"
"Ah, Caderousse," said Andrea, "how covetous you are! Two
months ago you were dying with hunger."

"Faith, yes," replied Andrea, whose hunger prevailed over
every other feeling.

"The appetite grows by what it feeds on," said Caderousse,
grinning and showing his teeth, like a monkey laughing or a
tiger growling. "And," added he, biting off with his large
"So you like it, you rogue?"
white teeth an enormous mouthful of bread, "I have formed
"So much that I wonder how a man who can cook thus can
a plan." Caderousse's plans alarmed Andrea still more than
complain of hard living."
his ideas; ideas were but the germ, the plan was reality. "Let
"Do you see," said Caderousse, "all my happiness is marred me see your plan; I dare say it is a pretty one."
by one thought?"
"Why not? Who formed the plan by which we left the
"What is that?"
establishment of M ---- ! eh? was it not I? and it was no bad
"That I am dependent on another, I who have always gained one I believe, since here we are!"
my own livelihood honestly."
"Do not let that disturb you, I have enough for two."
"No, truly; you may believe me if you will; at the end of
every month I am tormented by remorse."
"Good Caderousse!"
"So much so, that yesterday I would not take the two
hundred francs."

"I do not say," replied Andrea, "that you never make a good
one; but let us see your plan."
"Well," pursued Caderousse, "can you without expending
one sou, put me in the way of getting fifteen thousand francs?
No, fifteen thousand are not enough, -- I cannot again
become an honest man with less than thirty thousand
francs."
"No," replied Andrea, dryly, "no, I cannot."

"Yes, you wished to speak to me; but was it indeed remorse,
tell me?"

"I do not think you understand me," replied Caderousse,
calmly; "I said without your laying out a sou."

"True remorse; and, besides, an idea had struck me." Andrea
shuddered; he always did so at Caderousse's ideas. "It is
miserable -- do you see? -- always to wait till the end of the
month. -- "Oh," said Andrea philosophically, determined to
watch his companion narrowly, "does not life pass in waiting?
Do I, for instance, fare better? Well, I wait patiently, do I
not?"

"Do you want me to commit a robbery, to spoil all my good
fortune -- and yours with mine -- and both of us to be
dragged down there again?"
"It would make very little difference to me," said Caderousse,
"if I were retaken, I am a poor creature to live alone, and
sometimes pine for my old comrades; not like you, heartless
creature, who would be glad never to see them again."
Andrea did more than tremble this time, he turned pale.

"Yes; because instead of expecting two hundred wretched
francs, you expect five or six thousand, perhaps ten, perhaps
even twelve, for you take care not to let any one know the "Come, Caderousse, no nonsense!" said he.
utmost. Down there, you always had little presents and "Don't alarm yourself, my little Benedetto, but just point out
Christmas-boxes which you tried to hide from your poor to me some means of gaining those thirty thousand francs
friend Caderousse. Fortunately he is a cunning fellow, that

339


CHAPTER 81


THE ROOM OF THE RETIRED BAKER

without your assistance, and I will contrive it."

"Well, Caderousse, it is Monte Cristo."

"Well, I'll see -- I'll try to contrive some way," said Andrea.

"Bah!"

"Meanwhile you will raise my monthly allowance to five
hundred francs, my little fellow? I have a fancy, and mean to
get a housekeeper."

"Yes, you understand, that explains all. He cannot
acknowledge me openly, it appears, but he does it through
M. Cavalcanti, and gives him fifty thousand francs for it."

"Well, you shall have your five hundred francs," said Andrea; "Fifty thousand francs for being your father? I would have
"but it is very hard for me, my poor Caderousse -- you take done it for half that, for twenty thousand, for fifteen
thousand; why did you not think of me, ungrateful man?"
advantage" -"Bah," said Caderousse, "when you have access to countless
stores." One would have said Andrea anticipated his
companion's words, so did his eye flash like lightning, but it
was but for a moment. "True," he replied, "and my protector
is very kind."

"Did I know anything about it, when it was all done when I
was down there?"

"That dear protector," said Caderousse; "and how much does
he give you monthly?"

"Are you sure of it?"

"Five thousand francs."
"As many thousands as you give me hundreds! Truly, it is
only bastards who are thus fortunate. Five thousand francs
per month! What the devil can you do with all that?"

"Ah, truly? And you say that by his will" -"He leaves me five hundred thousand livres."
"He showed it me; but that is not all -- there is a codicil, as I
said just now."
"Probably."
"And in that codicil he acknowledges me."

"Oh, it is no trouble to spend that; and I am like you, I want
capital."

"Oh, the good father, the brave father, the very honest
father!" said Caderousse, twirling a plate in the air between
his two hands.

"Capital? -- yes -- I understand -- every one would like
capital."

"Now say if I conceal anything from you?"

"Well, and I shall get it."
"Who will give it to you -- your prince?"

"No, and your confidence makes you honorable in my
opinion; and your princely father, is he rich, very rich?"

"Yes, my prince. But unfortunately I must wait."

"Yes, he is that; he does not himself know the amount of his
fortune."

"You must wait for what?" asked Caderousse.

"Is it possible?"

"For his death "

"Indeed?"

"It is evident enough to me, who am always at his house. The
other day a banker's clerk brought him fifty thousand francs
in a portfolio about the size of your plate; yesterday his
banker brought him a hundred thousand francs in gold."
Caderousse was filled with wonder; the young man's words
sounded to him like metal, and he thought he could hear the
rushing of cascades of louis. "And you go into that house?"
cried he briskly.

"On my honor."

"When I like."

"For how much?"
"Only that? It's little enough "

Caderousse was thoughtful for a moment. It was easy to
perceive he was revolving some unfortunate idea in his
mind. Then suddenly, -- "How I should like to see all that,"
cried he; "how beautiful it must be!"

"But so it is."

"It is, in fact, magnificent," said Andrea.

"No it cannot be!"

"And does he not live in the Champs-Elysees?"

"Are you my friend, Caderousse?"

"Yes, No. 30."

"Yes, in life or death."

"Ah," said Caderousse, "No. 30."

"Well, I will tell you a secret."

"Yes, a fine house standing alone, between a court-yard and
a garden, -- you must know it."

"The death of your prince?"
"Yes."
"How so?"
"Because he has made his will in my favor."

"For five hundred thousand."

"What is it?"
"But remember" -"Ah, pardieu, mute as a carp."
"Well, I think" -- Andrea stopped and looked around.
"You think? Do not fear; pardieu, we are alone."
"I think I have discovered my father."
"Your true father?"
"Yes."

"Possibly; but it is not the exterior I care for, it is the interior.
What beautiful furniture there must be in it!"
"Have you ever seen the Tuileries?"
"No."
"Well, it surpasses that."
"It must be worth one's while to stoop, Andrea, when that
good M. Monte Cristo lets fall his purse."

"Not old Cavalcanti?"

"It is not worth while to wait for that," said Andrea; "money
is as plentiful in that house as fruit in an orchard."

"No, for he has gone again; the true one, as you say."

"But you should take me there one day with you."

"And that father is" --

"How can I? On what plea?"

340

"You are right; but you have made my mouth water. I must
absolutely see it; I shall find a way."
"No nonsense, Caderousse!"
"I will offer myself as floor-polisher."
"The rooms are all carpeted."
"Well, then, I must be contented to imagine it."
"That is the best plan, believe me."
"Try, at least, to give me an idea of what it is."
"How can I?"
"Nothing is easier. Is it large?"

"I was saying to him only yesterday, `You are imprudent,
Monsieur Count; for when you go to Auteuil and take your
servants the house is left unprotected.' Well,' said he, `what
next?' `Well, next, some day you will be robbed.'"
"What did he answer?"
"He quietly said, `What do I care if I am?'"
"Andrea, he has some secretary with a spring."
"How do you know?"
"Yes, which catches the thief in a trap and plays a tune. I was
told there were such at the last exhibition."

"Middling."

"He has simply a mahogany secretary, in which the key is
always kept."

"How is it arranged?"

"And he is not robbed?"

"Faith, I should require pen, ink, and paper to make a plan."

"No; his servants are all devoted to him."

"They are all here," said Caderousse, briskly. He fetched
from an old secretary a sheet of white paper and pen and ink.
"Here," said Caderousse, "draw me all that on the paper, my
boy." Andrea took the pen with an imperceptible smile and
began. "The house, as I said, is between the court and the
garden; in this way, do you see?" Andrea drew the garden,
the court and the house.

"There ought to be some money in that secretary?"
"There may be. No one knows what there is."
"And where is it?"
"On the first floor."
"Sketch me the plan of that floor, as you have done of the
ground floor, my boy."

"High walls?"

"That is very simple." Andrea took the pen. "On the first
story, do you see, there is the anteroom and the
drawing-room; to the right of the drawing-room, a library
"That is not prudent," said Caderousse.
and a study; to the left, a bedroom and a dressing-room. The
"In the court are orange-trees in pots, turf, and clumps of famous secretary is in the dressing-room."
flowers."
"Is there a window in the dressing-room?"
"And no steel-traps?"
"Two, -- one here and one there." Andrea sketched two
"No."
windows in the room, which formed an angle on the plan,
and appeared as a small square added to the rectangle of the
"The stables?"
bedroom. Caderousse became thoughtful. "Does he often go
"Are on either side of the gate, which you see there." And to Auteuil?" added he.
Andrea continued his plan.
"Two or three times a week. To-morrow, for instance, he is
"Let us see the ground floor," said Caderousse.
going to spend the day and night there."
"On the ground-floor, dining-room, two drawing-rooms, "Are you sure of it?"
billiard-room, staircase in the hall, and a little back staircase."
"He has invited me to dine there."
"Windows?"
"There's a life for you," said Caderousse; "a town house and a
"Magnificent windows, so beautiful, so large, that I believe a country house."
man of your size should pass through each frame."
"That is what it is to be rich."
"Why the devil have they any stairs with such windows?"
"And shall you dine there?"
"Luxury has everything."
"Probably."
"But shutters?"
"When you dine there, do you sleep there?"
"Yes, but they are never used. That Count of Monte Cristo is
"If I like; I am at home there." Caderousse looked at the
an original, who loves to look at the sky even at night."
young man, as if to get at the truth from the bottom of his
"And where do the servants sleep?"
heart. But Andrea drew a cigar-case from his pocket, took a
"Oh, they have a house to themselves. Picture to yourself a havana, quietly lit it, and began smoking. "When do you
pretty coach-house at the right-hand side where the ladders want your twelve hundred francs?" said he to Caderousse.
are kept. Well, over that coach-house are the servants' rooms, "Now, if you have them." Andrea took five and twenty louis
with bells corresponding with the different apartments."
from his pocket.
"Not more than eight or ten feet."

"Ah, diable -- bells did you say?"

"Yellow boys?" said Caderousse; "no, I thank you."

"What do you mean?"

"Oh, you despise them."

"Oh. nothing! I only say they cost a load of money to hang,
and what is the use of them, I should like to know?"

"On the contrary, I esteem them, but will not have them."

"There used to be a dog let loose in the yard at night, but it
has been taken to the house at Auteuil, to that you went to,
you know."
"Yes."

"You can change them, idiot; gold is worth five sous."
"Exactly; and he who changes them will follow friend
Caderousse, lay hands on him, and demand what farmers
pay him their rent in gold. No nonsense, my good fellow;
silver simply, round coins with the head of some monarch or
341


CHAPTER 81


THE ROOM OF THE RETIRED BAKER

other on them. Anybody may possess a five-franc piece."
"But do you suppose I carry five hundred francs about with
me? I should want a porter."
"Well, leave them with your porter; he is to be trusted. I will
call for them."
"To-day?"
"No, to-morrow; I shall not have time to day."
"Well, to-morrow I will leave them when I go to Auteuil."
"May I depend on it?"
"Certainly."
"Because I shall secure my housekeeper on the strength of it."
"Now see here, will that be all? Eh? And will you not
torment me any more?"
"Never." Caderousse had become so gloomy that Andrea
feared he should be obliged to notice the change. He
redoubled his gayety and carelessness. "How sprightly you
are," said Caderousse; "One would say you were already in
possession of your property."
"No, unfortunately; but when I do obtain it" --

"Confiteor," said Caderousse, putting the diamond on his
little finger; "I was mistaken; but those thieves of jewellers
imitate so well that it is no longer worth while to rob a
jeweller's shop -- it is another branch of industry paralyzed."
"Have you finished?" said Andrea, -- "do you want anything
more? -- will you have my waistcoat or my hat? Make free,
now you have begun."
"No; you are, after all, a good companion; I will not detain
you, and will try to cure myself of my ambition."
"But take care the same thing does not happen to you in
selling the diamond you feared with the gold."
"I shall not sell it -- do not fear."
"Not at least till the day after to-morrow," thought the young
man.
"Happy rogue," said Caderousse; "you are going to find your
servants, your horses, your carriage, and your betrothed!"
"Yes," said Andrea.
"Well, I hope you will make a handsome wedding-present
the day you marry Mademoiselle Danglars."

"Well?"

"I have already told you it is a fancy you have taken in your
head."

"I shall remember old friends, I can tell you that."

"What fortune has she?"

"Yes, since you have such a good memory."

"But I tell you" --

"What do you want? It looks as if you were trying to fleece
me?"

"A million?" Andrea shrugged his shoulders.

"I? What an idea! I, who am going to give you another piece
of good advice."

"Let it be a million," said Caderousse; "you can never have so
much as I wish you."
"Thank you," said the young man.

"What is it?"

"Oh, I wish it you with all my heart!" added Caderousse with
"To leave behind you the diamond you have on your finger. his hoarse laugh. "Stop, let me show you the way."
We shall both get into trouble. You will ruin both yourself "It is not worth while."
and me by your folly."
"Yes, it is."
"How so?" said Andrea.
"Why?"
"How? You put on a livery, you disguise yourself as a
"Because there is a little secret, a precaution I thought it
servant, and yet keep a diamond on your finger worth four
desirable to take, one of Huret & Fitchet's locks, revised and
or five thousand francs."
improved by Gaspard Caderousse; I will manufacture you a
"You guess well."
similar one when you are a capitalist."
"I know something of diamonds; I have had some."
"You do well to boast of it," said Andrea, who, without
becoming angry, as Caderousse feared, at this new extortion,
quietly resigned the ring. Caderousse looked so closely at it
that Andrea well knew that he was examining to see if all the
edges were perfect.
"It is a false diamond," said Caderousse.
"You are joking now," replied Andrea.
"Do not be angry, we can try it." Caderousse went to the
window, touched the glass with it, and found it would cut.

342

"Thank you," said Andrea; "I will let you know a week
beforehand." They parted. Caderousse remained on the
landing until he had not only seen Andrea go down the
three stories, but also cross the court. Then he returned
hastily, shut his door carefully, and began to study, like a
clever architect, the plan Andrea had left him.
"Dear Benedetto," said he, "I think he will not be sorry to
inherit his fortune, and he who hastens the day when he can
touch his five hundred thousand will not be his worst
friend."


Chapter 82

T

The Burglary

he day following that on which the conversation we
have related took place, the Count of Monte Cristo set
out for Auteuil, accompanied by Ali and several attendants,
and also taking with him some horses whose qualities he
was desirous of ascertaining. He was induced to undertake
this journey, of which the day before he had not even
thought and which had not occurred to Andrea either, by the
arrival of Bertuccio from Normandy with intelligence
respecting the house and sloop. The house was ready, and
the sloop which had arrived a week before lay at anchor in a
small creek with her crew of six men, who had observed all
the requisite formalities and were ready again to put to sea.

nature, that is to say, against God, and sometimes against the
world, that is, against the devil.

The count praised Bertuccio's zeal, and ordered him to
prepare for a speedy departure, as his stay in France would
not be prolonged more than a mouth. "Now," said he, "I may
require to go in one night from Paris to Treport; let eight
fresh horses be in readiness on the road, which will enable
me to go fifty leagues in ten hours."

"But will no one remain in the house, my lord?" asked
Baptistin.

* The Genoese conspirator.
"They do not want my papers," said Monte Cristo, "they
want to kill me; they are no robbers, but assassins. I will not
allow the prefect of police to interfere with my private affairs.
I am rich enough, forsooth, to distribute his authority on this
occasion." The count recalled Baptistin, who had left the
room after delivering the letter. "Return to Paris," said he;
"assemble the servants who remain there. I want all my
household at Auteuil."

"Yes, the porter."
"My lord will remember that the lodge is at a distance from
the house."

"Your highness had already expressed that wish," said "Well?"
Bertuccio, "and the horses are ready. I have bought them, "The house might be stripped without his hearing the least
and stationed them myself at the most desirable posts, that is, noise."
in villages, where no one generally stops."
"By whom?"
"That's well," said Monte Cristo; "I remain here a day or two
"By thieves."
-- arrange accordingly." As Bertuccio was leaving the room
to give the requisite orders, Baptistin opened the door: he "You are a fool, M. Baptistin. Thieves might strip the house -it would annoy me less than to be disobeyed." Baptistin
held a letter on a silver waiter.
bowed.
"What are you doing here?" asked the count, seeing him
"You understand me?" said the count. "Bring your comrades
covered with dust; "I did not send for you, I think?"
here, one and all; but let everything remain as usual, only
Baptistin, without answering, approached the count, and
close the shutters of the ground floor."
presented the letter. "Important and urgent," said he. The
"And those of the second floor?"
count opened the letter, and read: -"M. de Monte Cristo is apprised that this night a man will
enter his house in the Champs-Elysees with the intention of
carrying off some papers supposed to be in the secretary in
the dressing-room. The count's well-known courage will
render unnecessary the aid of the police, whose interference
might seriously affect him who sends this advice. The count,
by any opening from the bedroom, or by concealing himself
in the dressing-room, would be able to defend his property
himself. Many attendents or apparent precautions would
prevent the villain from the attempt, and M. de Monte Cristo
would lose the opportunity of discovering an enemy whom
chance has revealed to him who now sends this warning to
the count, -- a warning he might not be able to send another
time, if this first attempt should fail and another be made."
The count's first idea was that this was an artifice -- a gross
deception, to draw his attention from a minor danger in
order to expose him to a greater. He was on the point of
sending the letter to the commissary of police,
notwithstanding the advice of his anonymous friend, or
perhaps because of that advice, when suddenly the idea
occurred to him that it might be some personal enemy,
whom he alone should recognize and over whom, if such
were the case, he alone would gain any advantage, as Fiesco*
had done over the Moor who would have killed him. We
know the Count's vigorous and daring mind, denying
anything to be impossible, with that energy which marks the
great man. From his past life, from his resolution to shrink
from nothing, the count had acquired an inconceivable relish
for the contests in which he had engaged, sometimes against

"You know they are never closed. Go!"
The count signified his intention of dining alone, and that no
one but Ali should attend him. Having dined with his usual
tranquillity and moderation, the count, making a signal to
Ali to follow him, went out by the side-gate and on reaching
the Bois de Boulogne turned, apparently without design
towards Paris and at twilight; found himself opposite his
house in the Champs-Elysees. All was dark; one solitary,
feeble light was burning in the porter's lodge, about forty
paces distant from the house, as Baptistin had said. Monte
Cristo leaned against a tree, and with that scrutinizing
glance which was so rarely deceived, looked up and down
the avenue, examined the passers-by, and carefully looked
down the neighboring streets, to see that no one was
concealed. Ten minutes passed thus, and he was convinced
that no one was watching him. He hastened to the side-door
with Ali, entered hurriedly, and by the servants' staircase, of
which he had the key, gained his bedroom without opening
or disarranging a single curtain, without even the porter
having the slightest suspicion that the house, which he
supposed empty, contained its chief occupant.
Arrived in his bedroom, the count motioned to Ali to stop;
then he passed into the dressing-room, which he examined.
Everything appeared as usual -- the precious secretary in its
place, and the key in the secretary. He double locked it, took
the key, returned to the bedroom door, removed the double
staple of the bolt, and went in. Meanwhile Ali had procured
the arms the count required -- namely, a short carbine and a
pair of double-barrelled pistols, with which as sure an
343


CHAPTER 82


THE BURGLARY

aim might be taken as with a single-barrelled one. Thus
armed, the count held the lives of five men in his hands. It
was about half-past nine. The count and Ali ate in haste a
crust of bread and drank a glass of Spanish wine; then
Monte Cristo slipped aside one of the movable panels, which
enabled him to see into the adjoining room. He had within
his reach his pistols and carbine, and Ali, standing near him,
held one of the small Arabian hatchets, whose form has not
varied since the Crusades. Through one of the windows of
the bedroom, on a line with that in the dressing-room, the
count could see into the street.

man then drew from his pocket something which the count
could not discern, placed it on a stand, then went straight to
the secretary, felt the lock, and contrary to his expectation
found that the key was missing. But the glass-cutter was a
prudent man who had provided for all emergencies. The
count soon heard the rattling of a bunch of skeleton keys,
such as the locksmith brings when called to force a lock, and
which thieves call nightingales, doubtless from the music of
their nightly song when they grind against the bolt. "Ah, ha,"
whispered Monte Cristo with a smile of disappointment, "he
is only a thief."

Two hours passed thus. It was intensely dark; still Ali,
thanks to his wild nature, and the count, thanks doubtless to
his long confinement, could distinguish in the darkness the
slightest movement of the trees. The little light in the lodge
had long been extinct. It might be expected that the attack, if
indeed an attack was projected, would be made from the
staircase of the ground floor, and not from a window; in
Monte Cristo's opinion, the villains sought his life, not his
money. It would be his bedroom they would attack, and they
must reach it by the back staircase, or by the window in the
dressing-room. The clock of the Invalides struck a quarter to
twelve; the west wind bore on its moistened gusts the
doleful vibration of the three strokes.

But the man in the dark could not find the right key. He
reached the instrument he had placed on the stand, touched
a spring, and immediately a pale light, just bright enough to
render objects distinct, was reflected on his hands and
countenance. "By heavens," exclaimed Monte Cristo, starting
back, "it is" -Ali raised his hatchet. "Don't stir," whispered Monte Cristo,
"and put down your hatchet; we shall require no arms."
Then he added some words in a low tone, for the
exclamation which surprise had drawn from the count, faint
as it had been, had startled the man who remained in the
pose of the old knife-grinder. It was an order the count had
just given, for immediately Ali went noiselessly, and
returned, bearing a black dress and a three-cornered hat.
Meanwhile Monte Cristo had rapidly taken off his great-coat,
waistcoat, and shirt, and one might distinguish by the
glimmering through the open panel that he wore a pliant
tunic of steel mail, of which the last in France, where daggers
are no longer dreaded, was worn by King Louis XVI., who
feared the dagger at his breast, and whose head was cleft
with a hatchet. The tunic soon disappeared under a long
cassock, as did his hair under a priest's wig; the
three-cornered hat over this effectually transformed the
count into an abbe.

As the last stroke died away, the count thought he heard a
slight noise in the dressing-room; this first sound, or rather
this first grinding, was followed by a second, then a third; at
the fourth, the count knew what to expect. A firm and
well-practised hand was engaged in cutting the four sides of
a pane of glass with a diamond. The count felt his heart beat
more rapidly. Inured as men may be to danger, forewarned
as they may be of peril, they understand, by the fluttering of
the heart and the shuddering of the frame, the enormous
difference between a dream and a reality, between the
project and the execution. However, Monte Cristo only made
a sign to apprise Ali, who, understanding that danger was
The man, hearing nothing more, stood erect, and while
approaching from the other side, drew nearer to his master.
Monte Cristo was completing his disguise had advanced
Monte Cristo was eager to ascertain the strength and number
straight to the secretary, whose lock was beginning to crack
of his enemies.
under his nightingale.
The window whence the noise proceeded was opposite the
"Try again," whispered the count, who depended on the
opening by which the count could see into the
secret spring, which was unknown to the picklock, clever as
dressing-room. He fixed his eyes on that window -- he
he might be -- "try again, you have a few minutes' work
distinguished a shadow in the darkness; then one of the
there." And he advanced to the window. The man whom he
panes became quite opaque, as if a sheet of paper were stuck
had seen seated on a fence had got down, and was still
on the outside, then the square cracked without falling.
pacing the street; but, strange as it appeared, he cared not for
Through the opening an arm was passed to find the
those who might pass from the avenue of the
fastening, then a second; the window turned on its hinges,
Champs-Elysees or by the Faubourg St. Honore; his attention
and a man entered. He was alone.
was engrossed with what was passing at the count's, and his
"That's a daring rascal," whispered the count.
only aim appeared to be to discern every movement in the
dressing-room.
At that moment Ali touched him slightly on the shoulder.
He turned; Ali pointed to the window of the room in which Monte Cristo suddenly struck his finger on his forehead and
they were, facing the street. "I see!" said he, "there are two of a smile passed over his lips; then drawing near to Ali, he
them; one does the work while the other stands guard." He whispered, -made a sign to Ali not to lose sight of the man in the street,
"Remain here, concealed in the dark, and whatever noise you
and turned to the one in the dressing-room.
hear, whatever passes, only come in or show yourself if I call
The glass-cutter had entered, and was feeling his way, his you." Ali bowed in token of strict obedience. Monte Cristo
arms stretched out before him. At last he appeared to have then drew a lighted taper from a closet, and when the thief
made himself familiar with his surroundings. There were was deeply engaged with his lock, silently opened the door,
two doors; he bolted them both.
taking care that the light should shine directly on his face.
The door opened so quietly that the thief heard no sound;
When he drew near to the bedroom door, Monte Cristo
but, to his astonishment, the room was suddenly illuminated.
expected that he was coming in, and raised one of his pistols;
He turned.
but he simply heard the sound of the bolts sliding in their
copper rings. It was only a precaution. The nocturnal visitor, "Ah, good-evening, my dear M. Caderousse," said Monte
ignorant of the fact that the count had removed the staples, Cristo; "what are you doing here, at such an hour?"
might now think himself at home, and pursue his purpose
"The Abbe Busoni!" exclaimed Caderousse; and, not
with full security. Alone and free to act as he wished, the
knowing how this strange apparition could have entered
344

when he had bolted the doors, he let fall his bunch of keys,
and remained motionless and stupefied. The count placed
himself between Caderousse and the window, thus cutting
off from the thief his only chance of retreat. "The Abbe
Busoni!" repeated Caderousse, fixing his haggard gaze on
the count.

drawing nearer to Monte Cristo, "I may indeed say you are
my deliverer!"

"Yes, undoubtedly, the Abbe Busoni himself," replied Monte
Cristo. "And I am very glad you recognize me, dear M.
Caderousse; it proves you have a good memory, for it must
be about ten years since we last met." This calmness of
Busoni, combined with his irony and boldness, staggered
Caderousse.

"An Englishman."

"So you would rob the Count of Monte Cristo?" continued
the false abbe.

"No, not me, but a young Corsican, my companion."

bunch of false keys, a secretary half forced -- it is tolerably
evident" --

"Then this young man escaped with you?"

Caderousse was choking; he looked around for some corner
to hide in, some way of escape.

"In what way?"

"You mean to say you have been freed from confinement?"
"Yes, that is true, reverend sir."
"Who was your liberator?"
"What was his name?"
"Lord Wilmore."
"I know him; I shall know if you lie."

"Ah, reverend sir, I tell you the simple truth."
"The abbe, the abbe!" murmured he, clinching his fists, and
"Was this Englishman protecting you?"
his teeth chattering.
"What was this young Corsican's name?"
"Reverend sir," murmured Caderousse, seeking to regain the "Benedetto."
window, which the count pitilessly blocked -- "reverend sir, I
"Is that his Christian name?"
don't know -- believe me -- I take my oath" -"A pane of glass out," continued the count, "a dark lantern, a "He had no other; he was a foundling."
"He did."

"We were working at St. Mandrier, near Toulon. Do you
"Come, come," continued the count, "I see you are still the
know St. Mandrier?"
same, -- an assassin."
"I do."
"Reverend sir, since you know everything, you know it was
not I -- it was La Carconte; that was proved at the trial, since "In the hour of rest, between noon and one o'clock" -I was only condemned to the galleys."
"Galley-slaves having a nap after dinner! We may well pity
"Is your time, then, expired, since I find you in a fair way to the poor fellows!" said the abbe.
return there?"
"Nay," said Caderousse, "one can't always work -- one is not
a dog."
"No, reverend sir; I have been liberated by some one."
"That some one has done society a great kindness."

"So much the better for the dogs," said Monte Cristo.

"Ah," said Caderousse, "I had promised" --

"While the rest slept, then, we went away a short distance;
we severed our fetters with a file the Englishman had given
us, and swam away."

"And you are breaking your promise!" interrupted Monte
Cristo.
"Alas, yes!" said Caderousse very uneasily.
"A bad relapse, that will lead you, if I mistake not, to the
Place de Greve. So much the worse, so much the worse -diavolo, as they say in my country."
"Reverend sir, I am impelled" -"Every criminal says the same thing."
"Poverty" --

"And what is become of this Benedetto?"
"I don't know."
"You ought to know."
"No, in truth; we parted at Hyeres." And, to give more
weight to his protestation, Caderousse advanced another
step towards the abbe, who remained motionless in his place,
as calm as ever, and pursuing his interrogation. "You lie,"
said the Abbe Busoni, with a tone of irresistible authority.

"Pshaw!" said Busoni disdainfully; "poverty may make a
man beg, steal a loaf of bread at a baker's door, but not cause
him to open a secretary in a house supposed to be inhabited.
And when the jeweller Johannes had just paid you 40,000
francs for the diamond I had given you, and you killed him
to get the diamond and the money both, was that also
poverty?"

"Reverend sir!"

"Ah, reverend sir," cried Caderousse, clasping his hands, and

"And what is that great lord's name?"

"You lie! This man is still your friend, and you, perhaps,
make use of him as your accomplice."
"Oh, reverend sir!"
"Since you left Toulon what have you lived on? Answer me!"

"On what I could get."
"Pardon, reverend sir," said Caderousse; "you have saved my
"You lie," repeated the abbe a third time, with a still more
life once, save me again!"
imperative tone. Caderousse, terrified, looked at the count.
"That is but poor encouragement."
"You have lived on the money he has given you."
"Are you alone, reverend sir, or have you there soldiers
"True," said Caderousse; "Benedetto has become the son of a
ready to seize me?"
great lord."
"I am alone," said the abbe, "and I will again have pity on "How can he be the son of a great lord?"
you, and will let you escape, at the risk of the fresh miseries
"A natural son."
my weakness may lead to, if you tell me the truth."

345


CHAPTER 82


THE BURGLARY

"The Count of Monte Cristo, the very same in whose house
we are."
"Benedetto the count's
astonished in his turn.

son?"

replied

Monte

No. 59, and I No. 58. He was called Benedetto, but he is
ignorant of his real name, having never known his parents.

Cristo, "Sign it!" continued the count.

"But would you ruin me?"
"Well, I should think so, since the count has found him a
"If I sought your ruin, fool, I should drag you to the first
false father -- since the count gives him four thousand francs
guard-house; besides, when that note is delivered, in all
a month, and leaves him 500,000 francs in his will."
probability you will have no more to fear. Sign it, then!"
"Ah, yes," said the factitious abbe, who began to understand;
Caderousse signed it. "The address, `To monsieur the Baron
"and what name does the young man bear meanwhile?"
Danglars, banker, Rue de la Chaussee d'Antin.'" Caderousse
"Andrea Cavalcanti."
wrote the address. The abbe took the note. "Now," said he,
"that suffices -- begone!"
"Is it, then, that young man whom my friend the Count of
Monte Cristo has received into his house, and who is going "Which way?"
to marry Mademoiselle Danglars?"
"The way you came."
"Exactly."
"You wish me to get out at that window?"
"And you suffer that, you wretch -- you, who know his life
"You got in very well."
and his crime?"
"Oh, you have some design against me, reverend sir."
"Why should I stand in a comrade's way?" said Caderousse.
"Idiot! what design can I have?"
"You are right; it is not you who should apprise M. Danglars,
"Why, then, not let me out by the door?"
it is I."
"Do not do so, reverend sir."

"What would be the advantage of waking the porter?" --

"Why not?"

"Ah, reverend sir, tell me, do you wish me dead?"

"Because you would bring us to ruin."

"I wish what God wills."

"And you think that to save such villains as you I will
become an abettor of their plot, an accomplice in their
crimes?"

"But swear that you will not strike me as I go down."

"Reverend sir," said Caderousse, drawing still nearer.
"I will expose all."
"To whom?"
"To M. Danglars."
"By heaven!" cried Caderousse, drawing from his waistcoat
an open knife, and striking the count in the breast, "you shall
disclose nothing, reverend sir!" To Caderousse's great
astonishment, the knife, instead of piercing the count's breast,
flew back blunted. At the same moment the count seized
with his left hand the assassin's wrist, and wrung it with
such strength that the knife fell from his stiffened fingers,
and Caderousse uttered a cry of pain. But the count,
disregarding his cry, continued to wring the bandit's wrist,
until, his arm being dislocated, he fell first on his knees, then
flat on the floor. The count then placed his foot on his head,
saying, "I know not what restrains me from crushing thy
skull, rascal."
"Ah, mercy -- mercy!" cried Caderousse. The count withdrew
his foot. "Rise!" said he. Caderousse rose.
"What a wrist you have, reverend sir!" said Caderousse.
stroking his arm, all bruised by the fleshy pincers which had
held it; "what a wrist!"
"Silence! God gives me strength to overcome a wild beast
like you; in the name of that God I act, -- remember that,
wretch, -- and to spare thee at this moment is still serving
him."
"Oh!" said Caderousse, groaning with pain.
"Take this pen and paper, and write what I dictate."

"Cowardly fool!"
"What do you intend doing with me?"
"I ask you what can I do? I have tried to make you a happy
man, and you have turned out a murderer."
"Oh, monsieur," said Caderousse, "make one more attempt -try me once more!"
"I will," said the count. "Listen -- you know if I may be relied
on."
"Yes," said Caderousse.
"If you arrive safely at home" -"What have I to fear, except from you?"
"If you reach your home safely, leave Paris, leave France,
and wherever you may be, so long as you conduct yourself
well, I will send you a small annuity; for, if you return home
safely, then" -"Then?" asked Caderousse, shuddering.
"Then I shall believe God has forgiven you, and I will forgive
you too."
"As true as I am a Christian," stammered Caderousse, "you
will make me die of fright!"
"Now begone," said the count, pointing to the window.
Caderousse, scarcely yet relying on this promise, put his legs
out of the window and stood on the ladder. "Now go down,"
said the abbe, folding his arms. Understanding he had
nothing more to fear from him, Caderousse began to go
down. Then the count brought the taper to the window, that
it might be seen in the Champs-Elysees that a man was
getting out of the window while another held a light.

"What are you doing, reverend sir? Suppose a watchman
should pass?" And he blew out the light. He then descended,
"You lie! Take this pen, and write!" Caderousse, awed by the but it was only when he felt his foot touch the ground that
superior power of the abbe, sat down and wrote: -he was satisfied of his safety.
"I don't know how to write, reverend sir."

Sir, -- The man whom you are receiving at your house, and
to whom you intend to marry your daughter, is a felon who
escaped with me from confinement at Toulon. He was
346

Monte Cristo returned to his bedroom, and, glancing rapidly
from the garden to the street, he saw first Caderousse, who
after walking to the end of the garden, fixed his ladder

against the wall at a different part from where he came in.
The count then looking over into the street, saw the man
who appeared to be waiting run in the same direction, and
place himself against the angle of the wall where Caderousse
would come over. Caderousse climbed the ladder slowly,
and looked over the coping to see if the street was quiet. No
one could be seen or heard. The clock of the Invalides struck
one. Then Caderousse sat astride the coping, and drawing
up his ladder passed it over the wall; then he began to
descend, or rather to slide down by the two stanchions,
which he did with an ease which proved how accustomed he
was to the exercise. But, once started, he could not stop. In
vain did he see a man start from the shadow when he was
halfway down -- in vain did he see an arm raised as he
touched the ground. Before he could defend himself that
arm struck him so violently in the back that he let go the

ladder, crying, "Help!" A second blow struck him almost
immediately in the side, and he fell, calling, "Help, murder!"
Then, as he rolled on the ground, his adversary seized him
by the hair, and struck him a third blow in the chest. This
time Caderousse endeavored to call again, but he could only
utter a groan, and he shuddered as the blood flowed from
his three wounds. The assassin, finding that he no longer
cried out, lifted his head up by the hair; his eyes were closed,
and the mouth was distorted. The murderer, supposing him
dead, let fall his head and disappeared. Then Caderousse,
feeling that he was leaving him, raised himself on his elbow,
and with a dying voice cried with great effort, "Murder! I am
dying! Help, reverend sir, -- help!"
This mournful appeal pierced the darkness. The door of the
back-staircase opened, then the side-gate of the garden, and
Ali and his master were on the spot with lights.

347


CHAPTER 83


Chapter 83

C

THE HAND OF GOD

The Hand Of God

aderousse continued to call piteously, "Help, reverend
sir, help!"

"What is the matter?" asked Monte Cristo.
"Help," cried Caderousse; "I am murdered!"
"We are here; -- take courage."
"Ah, it's all over! You are come too late -- you are come to see
me die. What blows, what blood!" He fainted. Ali and his
master conveyed the wounded man into a room. Monte
Cristo motioned to Ali to undress him, and he then
examined his dreadful wounds. "My God!" he exclaimed,
"thy vengeance is sometimes delayed, but only that it may
fall the more effectually." Ali looked at his master for further
instructions. "Bring here immediately the king's attorney, M.
de Villefort, who lives in the Faubourg St. Honore. As you
pass the lodge, wake the porter, and send him for a
surgeon." Ali obeyed, leaving the abbe alone with
Caderousse, who had not yet revived.
When the wretched man again opened his eyes, the count
looked at him with a mournful expression of pity, and his
lips moved as if in prayer. "A surgeon, reverend sir -- a
surgeon!" said Caderousse.

it."
Monte Cristo gave the pen to Caderousse, who collected all
his strength, signed it, and fell back on his bed, saying: "You
will relate all the rest, reverend sir; you will say he calls
himself Andrea Cavalcanti. He lodges at the Hotel des
Princes. Oh, I am dying!" He again fainted. The abbe made
him smell the contents of the phial, and he again opened his
eyes. His desire for revenge had not forsaken him.
"Ah, you will tell all I have said, will you not, reverend sir?"
"Yes, and much more."
"What more will you say?"
"I will say he had doubtless given you the plan of this house,
in the hope the count would kill you. I will say, likewise, he
had apprised the count, by a note, of your intention, and, the
count being absent, I read the note and sat up to await you."
"And he will be guillotined, will be not?" said Caderousse.
"Promise me that, and I will die with that hope."
"I will say," continued the count, "that he followed and
watched you the whole time, and when he saw you leave the
house, ran to the angle of the wall to conceal himself."

"I have sent for one," replied the abbe.

"Did you see all that?"

"I know he cannot save my life, but he may strengthen me to
give my evidence."

"Remember my words: `If you return home safely, I shall
believe God has forgiven you, and I will forgive you also.'"

"Against whom?"

"And you did not warn me!" cried Caderousse, raising
himself on his elbows. "You knew I should be killed on
leaving this house, and did not warn me!"

"Against my murderer."
"Did you recognize him?"
"Yes; it was Benedetto."
"The young Corsican?"
"Himself."
"Your comrade?"
"Yes. After giving me the plan of this house, doubtless
hoping I should kill the count and he thus become his heir,
or that the count would kill me and I should be out of his
way, he waylaid me, and has murdered me."
"I have also sent for the procureur."
"He will not come in time; I feel my life fast ebbing."
"Wait a moment," said Monte Cristo. He left the room, and
returned in five minutes with a phial. The dying man's eyes
were all the time riveted on the door, through which he
hoped succor would arrive. "Hasten, reverend sir, hasten! I
shall faint again!" Monte Cristo approached, and dropped on
his purple lips three or four drops of the contents of the phial.
Caderousse drew a deep breath. "Oh," said he, "that is life to
me; more, more!"
"Two drops more would kill you," replied the abbe.
"Oh, send for some one to whom I can denounce the wretch!"

"No; for I saw God's justice placed in the hands of Benedetto,
and should have thought it sacrilege to oppose the designs
of providence."
"God's justice! Speak not of it, reverend sir. If God were just,
you know how many would be punished who now escape."
"Patience," said the abbe, in a tone which made the dying
man shudder; "have patience!" Caderousse looked at him
with amazement. "Besides," said the abbe, "God is merciful
to all, as he has been to you; he is first a father, then a judge."
"Do you then believe in God?" said Caderousse.
"Had I been so unhappy as not to believe in him until now,"
said Monte Cristo, "I must believe on seeing you."
Caderousse raised his clinched hands towards heaven.
"Listen," said the abbe, extending his hand over the
wounded man, as if to command him to believe; "this is
what the God in whom, on your death-bed, you refuse to
believe, has done for you -- he gave you health, strength,
regular employment, even friends -- a life, in fact, which a
man might enjoy with a calm conscience. Instead of
improving these gifts, rarely granted so abundantly, this has
been your course -- you have given yourself up to sloth and
drunkenness, and in a fit of intoxication have ruined your
best friend."

"Shall I write your deposition? You can sign it."

"Help!" cried Caderousse; "I require a surgeon, not a priest;
"Yes yes," said Caderousse; and his eyes glistened at the perhaps I am not mortally wounded -- I may not die;
perhaps they can yet save my life."
thought of this posthumous revenge. Monte Cristo wrote: -"I die, murdered by the Corsican Benedetto, my comrade in "Your wounds are so far mortal that, without the three drops
I gave you, you would now be dead. Listen, then."
the galleys at Toulouse, No. 59."
"Quick, quick!" said Caderousse, "or I shall be unable to sign
348

"Ah," murmured Caderousse, "what a strange priest you are;

you drive the dying to despair, instead of consoling them."

repentance. Reflect, then, wretched man, and repent."

"Listen," continued the abbe. "When you had betrayed your
friend God began not to strike, but to warn you. Poverty
overtook you. You had already passed half your life in
coveting that which you might have honorably acquired;
and already you contemplated crime under the excuse of
want, when God worked a miracle in your behalf, sending
you, by my hands, a fortune -- brilliant, indeed, for you, who
had never possessed any. But this unexpected, unhoped-for,
unheard-of fortune sufficed you no longer when you once
possessed it; you wished to double it, and how? -- by a
murder! You succeeded, and then God snatched it from you,
and brought you to justice."

"No," said Caderousse, "no; I will not repent. There is no God;
there is no providence -- all comes by chance." --

"No one, I tell you, will escape; Benedetto will be punished."

He approached the dying man, and, leaning over him with a
calm and melancholy look, he whispered, "I am -- I am" -And his almost closed lips uttered a name so low that the
count himself appeared afraid to hear it. Caderousse, who
had raised himself on his knees, and stretched out his arm,
tried to draw back, then clasping his hands, and raising them
with a desperate effort, "O my God, my God!" said he,
"pardon me for having denied thee; thou dost exist, thou art
indeed man's father in heaven, and his judge on earth. My
God, my Lord, I have long despised thee! Pardon me, my
God; receive me, O my Lord!" Caderousse sighed deeply,
and fell back with a groan. The blood no longer flowed from
his wounds. He was dead.

"There is a providence; there is a God," said Monte Cristo, "of
whom you are a striking proof, as you lie in utter despair,
denying him, while I stand before you, rich, happy, safe and
entreating that God in whom you endeavor not to believe,
while in your heart you still believe in him."

"But who are you, then?" asked Caderousse, fixing his dying
eyes on the count. "Look well at me!" said Monte Cristo,
putting the light near his face. "Well, the abbe -- the Abbe
Busoni." Monte Cristo took off the wig which disfigured him,
and let fall his black hair, which added so much to the
"It was not I who wished to kill the Jew," said Caderousse; "it
beauty of his pallid features. "Oh?" said Caderousse,
was La Carconte."
thunderstruck, "but for that black hair, I should say you
"Yes," said Monte Cristo, "and God, -- I cannot say in justice, were the Englishman, Lord Wilmore."
for his justice would have slain you, -- but God, in his mercy,
"I am neither the Abbe Busoni nor Lord Wilmore," said
spared your life."
Monte Cristo; "think again, -- do you not recollect me?"
"Pardieu, to transport me for life, how merciful!"
Those was a magic effect in the count's words, which once
more revived the exhausted powers of the miserable man.
"You thought it a mercy then, miserable wretch! The coward
"Yes, indeed," said he; "I think I have seen you and known
who feared death rejoiced at perpetual disgrace; for like all
you formerly."
galley-slaves, you said, `I may escape from prison, I cannot
from the grave.' And you said truly; the way was opened for "Yes, Caderousse, you have seen me; you knew me once."
you unexpectedly. An Englishman visited Toulon, who had
"Who, then, are you? and why, if you knew me, do you let
vowed to rescue two men from infamy, and his choice fell on
me die?"
you and your companion. You received a second fortune,
money and tranquillity were restored to you, and you, who "Because nothing can save you; your wounds are mortal.
had been condemned to a felon's life, might live as other Had it been possible to save you, I should have considered it
men. Then, wretched creature, then you tempted God a third another proof of God's mercy, and I would again have
time. `I have not enough,' you said, when you had more than endeavored to restore you, I swear by my father's tomb."
you before possessed, and you committed a third crime, "By your father's tomb!" said Caderousse, supported by a
without reason, without excuse. God is wearied; he has supernatural power, and half-raising himself to see more
punished you." Caderousse was fast sinking. "Give me distinctly the man who had just taken the oath which all men
drink," said he: "I thirst -- I burn!" Monte Cristo gave him a hold sacred; "who, then, are you?" The count had watched
glass of water. "And yet that villain, Benedetto, will escape!" the approach of death. He knew this was the last struggle.
"Then, you, too, will be punished, for you did not do your
duty as a priest -- you should have prevented Benedetto
from killing me."
"I?" said the count, with a smile which petrified the dying
man, "when you had just broken your knife against the coat
of mail which protected my breast! Yet perhaps if I had
found you humble and penitent, I might have prevented
Benedetto from killing you; but I found you proud and
blood-thirsty, and I left you in the hands of God."
"I do not believe there is a God," howled Caderousse; "you
do not believe it; you lie -- you lie!"
"Silence," said the abbe; "you will force the last drop of blood
from your veins. What! you do not believe in God when he is
striking you dead? you will not believe in him, who requires
but a prayer, a word, a tear, and he will forgive? God, who
might have directed the assassin's dagger so as to end your
career in a moment, has given you this quarter of an hour for

"One!" said the count mysteriously, his eyes fixed on the
corpse, disfigured by so awful a death. Ten minutes
afterwards the surgeon and the procureur arrived, the one
accompanied by the porter, the other by Ali, and were
received by the Abbe Busoni, who was praying by the side of
the corpse.

349


CHAPTER 84


Chapter 84

T

BEAUCHAMP

Beauchamp

he daring attempt to rob the count was the topic of
conversation throughout Paris for the next fortnight. The
dying man had signed a deposition declaring Benedetto to
be the assassin. The police had orders to make the strictest
search for the murderer. Caderousse's knife, dark lantern,
bunch of keys, and clothing, excepting the waistcoat, which
could not be found, were deposited at the registry; the
corpse was conveyed to the morgue. The count told every
one that this adventure had happened during his absence at
Auteuil, and that he only knew what was related by the
Abbe Busoni, who that evening, by mere chance, had
requested to pass the night in his house, to examine some
valuable books in his library. Bertuccio alone turned pale
whenever Benedetto's name was mentioned in his presence,
but there was no reason why any one should notice his
doing so. Villefort, being called on to prove the crime, was
preparing his brief with the same ardor that he was
accustomed to exercise when required to speak in criminal
cases.

on perceiving him Beauchamp stopped. "Your arrival here,
without waiting my visit at your house to-day, looks well,
sir," said Albert. "Tell me, may I shake hands with you,
saying, `Beauchamp, acknowledge you have injured me, and
retain my friendship,' or must I simply propose to you a
choice of arms?"

listen, or to express a single doubt to the baron. The baron
adored Count Andrea Cavalcanti: not so Mademoiselle
Eugenie Danglars. With an instinctive hatred of matrimony,
she suffered Andrea's attentions in order to get rid of
Morcerf; but when Andrea urged his suit, she betrayed an
entire dislike to him. The baron might possibly have
perceived it, but, attributing it to a caprice, feigned
ignorance.

"Yes."

"Albert," said Beauchamp, with a look of sorrow which
stupefied the young man, "let us first sit down and talk."
"Rather, sir, before we sit down, I must demand your
answer."
"Albert," said the journalist, "these are questions which it is
difficult to answer."
"I will facilitate it by repeating the question, `Will you, or
will you not, retract?'"

"Morcerf, it is not enough to answer `yes' or `no' to questions
which concern the honor, the social interest, and the life of
such a man as Lieutenant-general the Count of Morcerf, peer
But three weeks had already passed, and the most diligent of France."
search had been unsuccessful; the attempted robbery and the "What must then be done?"
murder of the robber by his comrade were almost forgotten
"What I have done, Albert. I reasoned thus -- money, time,
in anticipation of the approaching marriage of Mademoiselle
and fatigue are nothing compared with the reputation and
Danglars to the Count Andrea Cavalcanti. It was expected
interests of a whole family; probabilities will not suffice, only
that this wedding would shortly take place, as the young
facts will justify a deadly combat with a friend. If I strike
man was received at the banker's as the betrothed. Letters
with the sword, or discharge the contents of a pistol at man
had been despatched to M. Cavalcanti, as the count's father,
with whom, for three years, I have been on terms of intimacy,
who highly approved of the union, regretted his inability to
I must, at least, know why I do so; I must meet him with a
leave Parma at that time, and promised a wedding gift of a
heart at ease, and that quiet conscience which a man needs
hundred and fifty thousand livres. It was agreed that the
when his own arm must save his life."
three millions should be intrusted to Danglars to invest;
some persons had warned the young man of the "Well," said Morcerf, impatiently, "what does all this mean?"
circumstances of his future father-in-law, who had of late "It means that I have just returned from Yanina."
sustained
repeated
losses;
but
with
sublime
disinterestedness and confidence the young man refused to "From Yanina?"

The delay demanded by Beauchamp had nearly expired.
Morcerf appreciated the advice of Monte Cristo to let things
die away of their own accord. No one had taken up the
remark about the general, and no one had recognized in the
officer who betrayed the castle of Yanina the noble count in
the House of Peers. Albert, however felt no less insulted; the
few lines which had irritated him were certainly intended as
an insult. Besides, the manner in which Beauchamp had
closed the conference left a bitter recollection in his heart. He
cherished the thought of the duel, hoping to conceal its true
cause even from his seconds. Beauchamp had not been seen
since the day he visited Albert, and those of whom the latter
inquired always told him he was out on a journey which
would detain him some days. Where he was no one knew.
One morning Albert was awakened by his valet de chambre,
who announced Beauchamp. Albert rubbed his eyes,
ordered his servant to introduce him into the small
smoking-room on the ground-floor, dressed himself quickly,
and went down. He found Beauchamp pacing the room;
350

"Impossible!"
"Here is my passport; examine the visa -- Geneva, Milan,
Venice, Trieste, Delvino, Yanina. Will you believe the
government of a republic, a kingdom, and an empire?"
Albert cast his eyes on the passport, then raised them in
astonishment to Beauchamp. "You have been to Yanina?"
said he.
"Albert, had you been a stranger, a foreigner, a simple lord,
like that Englishman who came to demand satisfaction three
or four months since, and whom I killed to get rid of, I
should not have taken this trouble; but I thought this mark
of consideration due to you. I took a week to go, another to
return, four days of quarantine, and forty-eight hours to stay
there; that makes three weeks. I returned last night, and here
I am."
"What circumlocution! How long you are before you tell me
what I most wish to know?"
"Because, in truth, Albert" -"You hesitate?"
"Yes, -- I fear."
"You fear to acknowledge that your correspondent his
deceived you? Oh, no self-love, Beauchamp. Acknowledge it,
Beauchamp; your courage cannot be doubted."

"Not so," murmured the journalist; "on the contrary" --

"let it vanish as the last sparks from the blackened paper,
and disappear as the smoke from those silent ashes."

Albert turned frightfully pale; he endeavored to speak, but
the words died on his lips. "My friend," said Beauchamp, in "Yes, yes," said Albert, "and may there remain only the
the most affectionate tone, "I should gladly make an apology; eternal friendship which I promised to my deliverer, which
but, alas," -shall be transmitted to our children's children, and shall
always remind me that I owe my life and the honor of my
"But what?"
name to you, -- for had this been known, oh, Beauchamp, I
"The paragraph was correct, my friend."
should have destroyed myself; or, -- no, my poor mother! I
could not have killed her by the same blow, -- I should have
"What? That French officer" -fled from my country."
"Yes."
"Dear Albert," said Beauchamp. But this sudden and
"Fernand?"
factitious joy soon forsook the young man, and was
succeeded by a still greater grief.
"Yes."
"The traitor who surrendered the castle of the man in whose
service he was" --

"Well," said Beauchamp, "what still oppresses you, my
friend?"

"I am broken-hearted," said Albert. "Listen, Beauchamp! I
cannot thus, in a moment relinquish the respect, the
confidence, and pride with which a father's untarnished
name inspires a son. Oh, Beauchamp, Beauchamp, how shall
I now approach mine? Shall I draw back my forehead from
"My friend," said he, "here is a proof of it."
his embrace, or withhold my hand from his? I am the most
Albert opened the paper, it was an attestation of four notable wretched of men. Ah, my mother, my poor mother!" said
inhabitants of Yanina, proving that Colonel Fernand Albert, gazing through his tears at his mother's portrait; "if
Mondego, in the service of Ali Tepelini, had surrendered the you know this, how much must you suffer!"
castle for two million crowns. The signatures were perfectly
"Come," said Beauchamp, taking both his hands, "take
legal. Albert tottered and fell overpowered in a chair. It
courage, my friend."
could no longer be doubted; the family name was fully given.
After a moment's mournful silence, his heart overflowed, "But how came that first note to be inserted in your journal?
and he gave way to a flood of tears. Beauchamp, who had Some unknown enemy -- an invisible foe -- has done this."
watched with sincere pity the young man's paroxysm of "The more must you fortify yourself, Albert. Let no trace of
grief, approached him. "Now, Albert," said he, "you emotion be visible on your countenance, bear your grief as
understand me -- do you not? I wished to see all, and to the cloud bears within it ruin and death -- a fatal secret,
judge of everything for myself, hoping the explanation known only when the storm bursts. Go, my friend, reserve
would be in your father's favor, and that I might do him your strength for the moment when the crash shall come."
justice. But, on the contrary, the particulars which are given
prove that Fernand Mondego, raised by Ali Pasha to the "You think, then, all is not over yet?" said Albert,
rank of governor-general, is no other than Count Fernand of horror-stricken.
Morcerf; then, recollecting the honor you had done me, in "I think nothing, my friend; but all things are possible. By the
admitting me to your friendship, I hastened to you."
way" -"Pardon me, my friend, that man was your father!" Albert
advanced furiously towards Beauchamp, but the latter
restrained him more by a mild look than by his extended
hand.

Albert, still extended on the chair, covered his face with both
hands, as if to prevent the light from reaching him. "I
hastened to you," continued Beauchamp, "to tell you, Albert,
that in this changing age, the faults of a father cannot revert
upon his children. Few have passed through this
revolutionary period, in the midst of which we were born,
without some stain of infamy or blood to soil the uniform of
the soldier, or the gown of the magistrate. Now I have these
proofs, Albert, and I am in your confidence, no human
power can force me to a duel which your own conscience
would reproach you with as criminal, but I come to offer you
what you can no longer demand of me. Do you wish these
proofs, these attestations, which I alone possess, to be
destroyed? Do you wish this frightful secret to remain with
us? Confided to me, it shall never escape my lips; say, Albert,
my friend, do you wish it?"
Albert threw himself on Beauchamp's neck. "Ah, noble
fellow!" cried he.

"What?" said Albert, seeing that Beauchamp hesitated.
"Are you going to marry Mademoiselle Danglars?"
"Why do you ask me now?"
"Because the rupture or fulfilment of this engagement is
connected with the person of whom we were speaking."
"How?" said Albert, whose brow reddened; "you think M.
Danglars" -"I ask you only how your engagement stands? Pray put no
construction on my words I do not mean they should convey,
and give them no undue weight."
"No." said Albert, "the engagement is broken off."
"Well," said Beauchamp. Then, seeing the young man was
about to relapse into melancholy, "Let us go out, Albert,"
said he; "a ride in the wood in the phaeton, or on horseback,
will refresh you; we will then return to breakfast, and you
shall attend to your affairs, and I to mine."

"Take these," said Beauchamp, presenting the papers to
"Willingly," said Albert; "but let us walk. I think a little
Albert.
exertion would do me good." The two friends walked out on
Albert seized them with a convulsive hand, tore them in the fortress. When arrived at the Madeleine, -- "Since we are
pieces, and trembling lest the least vestige should escape and out," said Beauchamp, "let us call on M. de Monte Cristo; he
one day appear to confront him, he approached the is admirably adapted to revive one's spirits, because he
wax-light, always kept burning for cigars, and burned every never interrogates, and in my opinion those who ask no
fragment. "Dear, excellent friend," murmured Albert, still questions are the best comforters."
burning the papers.
"Gladly," said Albert; "I love him -- let us call."
"Let all be forgotten as a sorrowful dream," said Beauchamp;
351


CHAPTER 85


Chapter 85

M

onte Cristo uttered a joyful exclamation on seeing the
young men together. "Ah, ha!" said he, "I hope all is
over, explained and settled."

THE JOURNEY

The Journey
but like Pilate -- washing my hands."
"And what does Mademoiselle d'Armilly say to you for
robbing her of her pupil?"

"Yes," said Beauchamp; "the absurd reports have died away,
and should they be renewed, I would be the first to oppose
them; so let us speak no more of it."

"Oh, well, I don't know; but I understand that she is going to
Italy. Madame Danglars asked me for letters of
recommendation for the impresari; I gave her a few lines for
"Albert will tell you," replied the count "that I gave him the the director of the Valle Theatre, who is under some
same advice. Look," added he. "I am finishing the most obligation to me. But what is the matter, Albert? you look
execrable morning's work."
dull; are you, after all, unconsciously in love with
Mademoiselle Eugenie?"
"What is it?" said Albert; "arranging your papers,
apparently."
"I am not aware of it," said Albert, smiling sorrowfully.
Beauchamp turned to look at some paintings. "But,"
"My papers, thank God, no, -- my papers are all in capital
continued Monte Cristo, "you are not in your usual spirits?"
order, because I have none; but M. Cavalcanti's."
"I have a dreadful headache," said Albert.
"M. Cavalcanti's?" asked Beauchamp.
"Well, my dear viscount," said Monte Cristo, "I have an
"Yes; do you not know that this is a young man whom the
infallible remedy to propose to you."
count is introducing?" said Morcerf.
"What is that?" asked the young man.
"Let us not misunderstand each other," replied Monte Cristo;
"I introduce my one, and certainly not M. Cavalcanti."
"A change."
"And who," said Albert with a forced smile, "is to marry "Indeed?" said Albert.
Mademoiselle Danglars instead of me, which grieves me
"Yes; and as I am just now excessively annoyed, I shall go
cruelly."
from home. Shall we go together?"
"What? Cavalcanti is going to marry Mademoiselle
"You annoyed, count?" said Beauchamp; "and by what?"
Danglars?" asked Beauchamp.
"Ah, you think very lightly of it; I should like to see you with
"Certainly; do you come from the end of the world?" said
a brief preparing in your house."
Monte Cristo; "you, a journalist, the husband of renown? It is
"What brief?"
the talk of all Paris."
"And you, count, have made this match?" asked Beauchamp.
"I? Silence, purveyor of gossip, do not spread that report. I
make a match? No, you do not know me; I have done all in
my power to oppose it."
"Ah, I understand," said Beauchamp, "on our friend Albert's
account."
"On my account?" said the young man; "oh, no, indeed, the
count will do me the justice to assert that I have, on the
contrary, always entreated him to break off my engagement,
and happily it is ended. The count pretends I have not him
to thank; -- so be it -- I will erect an altar Deo ignoto."
"Listen," said Monte Cristo; "I have had little to do with it,
for I am at variance both with the father-in-law and the
young man; there is only Mademoiselle Eugenie, who
appears but little charmed with the thoughts of matrimony,
and who, seeing how little I was disposed to persuade her to
renounce her dear liberty, retains any affection for me."
"And do you say this wedding is at hand?"
"Oh, yes, in spite of all I could say. I do not know the young
man; he is said to be of good family and rich, but I never
trust to vague assertions. I have warned M. Danglars of it till
I am tired, but he is fascinated with his Luccanese. I have
even informed him of a circumstance I consider very serious;
the young man was either charmed by his nurse, stolen by
gypsies, or lost by his tutor, I scarcely know which. But I do
know his father lost sight of him for more than ten years;
what he did during these ten years, God only knows. Well,
all that was useless. They have commissioned me to write to
the major to demand papers, and here they are. I send them,
352

"The one M. de Villefort is preparing against my amiable
assassin -- some brigand escaped from the gallows
apparently."
"True," said Beauchamp; "I saw it in the paper. Who is this
Caderousse?"
"Some provincial, it appears. M. de Villefort heard of him at
Marseilles, and M. Danglars recollects having seen him.
Consequently, the procureur is very active in the affair, and
the prefect of police very much interested; and, thanks to
that interest, for which I am very grateful, they send me all
the robbers of Paris and the neighborhood, under pretence of
their being Caderousse's murderers, so that in three months,
if this continue, every robber and assassin in France will
have the plan of my house at his fingers' end. I am resolved
to desert them and go to some remote corner of the earth,
and shall be happy if you will accompany me, viscount."
"Willingly."
"Then it is settled?"
"Yes, but where?"
"I have told you, where the air is pure, where every sound
soothes, where one is sure to be humbled, however proud
may be his nature. I love that humiliation, I, who am master
of the universe, as was Augustus."
"But where are you really going?"
"To sea, viscount; you know I am a sailor. I was rocked when
an infant in the arms of old ocean, and on the bosom of the
beautiful Amphitrite; I have sported with the green mantle
of the one and the azure robe of the other; I love the sea as a
mistress, and pine if I do not often see her."

"Let us go, count."

has a noble nature; try to gain his esteem.'"

"To sea?"

"Indeed?" said Monte Cristo, sighing.

"Yes."

"You see, then," said Albert, "that instead of opposing, she
will encourage me."

"You accept my proposal?"
"I do."

"Adieu, then, until five o'clock; be punctual, and we shall
arrive at twelve or one."

"Well, Viscount, there will be in my court-yard this evening a
"At Treport?"
good travelling britzka, with four post-horses, in which one
may rest as in a bed. M. Beauchamp, it holds four very well, "Yes; or in the neighborhood."
will you accompany us?"
"But can we travel forty-eight leagues in eight hours?"
"Thank you, I have just returned from sea."
"Easily," said Monte Cristo.
"What? you have been to sea?"
"You are certainly a prodigy; you will soon not only surpass
"Yes; I have just made a little excursion to the Borromean the railway, which would not be very difficult in France, but
Islands."*
even the telegraph."
* Lake Maggiore.
"What of that? come with us," said Albert.

"But, viscount, since we cannot perform the journey in less
than seven or eight hours, do not keep me waiting."

"Do not fear, I have little to prepare." Monte Cristo smiled as
"No, dear Morcerf; you know I only refuse when the thing is
he nodded to Albert, then remained a moment absorbed in
impossible. Besides, it is important," added he in a low tone,
deep meditation. But passing his hand across his forehead as
"that I should remain in Paris just now to watch the paper."
if to dispel his revery, he rang the bell twice and Bertuccio
"Ah, you are a good and an excellent friend," said Albert; entered. "Bertuccio," said he, "I intend going this evening to
"yes, you are right; watch, watch, Beauchamp, and try to Normandy, instead of to-morrow or the next day. You will
discover the enemy who made this disclosure." Albert and have sufficient time before five o'clock; despatch a
Beauchamp parted, the last pressure of their hands messenger to apprise the grooms at the first station. M. de
expressing what their tongues could not before a stranger.
Morcerf will accompany me." Bertuccio obeyed and
"Beauchamp is a worthy fellow," said Monte Cristo, when despatched a courier to Pontoise to say the
travelling-carriage would arrive at six o'clock. From Pontoise
the journalist was gone; "is he not, Albert?"
another express was sent to the next stage, and in six hours
"Yes, and a sincere friend; I love him devotedly. But now we all the horses stationed on the road were ready. Before his
are alone, -- although it is immaterial to me, -- where are we departure, the count went to Haidee's apartments, told her
going?"
his intention, and resigned everything to her care. Albert
was punctual. The journey soon became interesting from its
"Into Normandy, if you like."
rapidity, of which Morcerf had formed no previous idea.
"Delightful; shall we be quite retired? have no society, no
"Truly," said Monte Cristo, "with your posthorses going at
neighbors?"
the rate of two leagues an hour, and that absurd law that one
"Our companions will be riding-horses, dogs to hunt with, traveller shall not pass another without permission, so that
and a fishing-boat."
an invalid or ill-tempered traveller may detain those who are
"Exactly what I wish for; I will apprise my mother of my well and active, it is impossible to move; I escape this
annoyance by travelling with my own postilion and horses;
intention, and return to you."
do I not, Ali?"
"But shall you be allowed to go into Normandy?"
The count put his head out of the window and whistled, and
"I may go where I please."
the horses appeared to fly. The carriage rolled with a
"Yes, I am aware you may go alone, since I once met you in thundering noise over the pavement, and every one turned
to notice the dazzling meteor. Ali, smiling, repeated the
Italy -- but to accompany the mysterious Monte Cristo?"
sound, grasped the reins with a firm hand, and spurred his
"You forget, count, that I have often told you of the deep
horses, whose beautiful manes floated in the breeze. This
interest my mother takes in you."
child of the desert was in his element, and with his black face
"`Woman is fickle.' said Francis I.; `woman is like a wave of and sparkling eyes appeared, in the cloud of dust he raised,
the sea,' said Shakespeare; both the great king and the great like the genius of the simoom and the god of the hurricane.
poet ought to have known woman's nature well."
"I never knew till now the delight of speed," said Morcerf,
and the last cloud disappeared from his brow; "but where
"Woman's, yes; my mother is not woman, but a woman."
the devil do you get such horses? Are they made to order?"
"As I am only a humble foreigner, you must pardon me if I
"Precisely," said the count; "six years since I bought a horse
do not understand all the subtle refinements of your
in Hungary remarkable for its swiftness. The thirty-two that
language."
we shall use to-night are its progeny; they are all entirely
"What I mean to say is, that my mother is not quick to give black, with the exception of a star upon the forehead."
her confidence, but when she does she never changes."
"That is perfectly admirable; but what do you do, count, with
"Ah, yes, indeed," said Monte Cristo with a sigh; "and do all these horses?"
you think she is in the least interested in me?"
"You see, I travel with them."
"I repeat it, you must really be a very strange and superior
"But you are not always travelling."
man, for my mother is so absorbed by the interest you have
excited, that when I am with her she speaks of no one else."
"When I no longer require them, Bertuccio will sell them,
and he expects to realize thirty or forty thousand francs by
"And does she try to make you dislike me?"
the sale."
"On the contrary, she often says, `Morcerf, I believe the count
353


CHAPTER 85

"But no monarch in Europe will be wealthy enough to
purchase them."

THE JOURNEY
the stream, dined in a summer-house overlooking the ocean,
and took tea in the library.

"Then he will sell them to some Eastern vizier, who will Towards the evening of the third day. Albert, completely
empty his coffers to purchase them, and refill them by exhausted with the exercise which invigorated Monte Cristo,
applying the bastinado to his subjects."
was sleeping in an arm-chair near the window, while the
count was designing with his architect the plan of a
"Count, may I suggest one idea to you?"
conservatory in his house, when the sound of a horse at full
"Certainly."
speed on the high road made Albert look up. He was
"It is that, next to you, Bertuccio must be the richest disagreeably surprised to see his own valet de chambre,
whom he had not brought, that he might not inconvenience
gentleman in Europe."
Monte Cristo.
"You are mistaken, viscount; I believe he has not a franc in
"Florentin here!" cried he, starting up; "is my mother ill?"
his possession."
And he hastened to the door. Monte Cristo watched and saw
"Then he must be a wonder. My dear count, if you tell me him approach the valet, who drew a small sealed parcel from
many more marvellous things, I warn you I shall not believe his pocket, containing a newspaper and a letter. "From
them."
whom is this?" said he eagerly. "From M. Beauchamp,"
"I countenance nothing that is marvellous, M. Albert. Tell me, replied Florentin.
why does a steward rob his master?"
"Did he send you?"
"Because, I suppose, it is his nature to do so, for the love of
robbing."
"You are mistaken; it is because he has a wife and family,
and ambitious desires for himself and them. Also because he
is not sure of always retaining his situation, and wishes to
provide for the future. Now, M. Bertuccio is alone in the
world; he uses my property without accounting for the use
he makes of it; he is sure never to leave my service."
"Why?"
"Because I should never get a better."
"Probabilities are deceptive."
"But I deal in certainties; he is the best servant over whom
one has the power of life and death."
"Do you possess that right over Bertuccio?"

"Yes, sir; he sent for me to his house, gave me money for my
journey, procured a horse, and made me promise not to stop
till I had reached you, I have come in fifteen hours."
Albert opened the letter with fear, uttered a shriek on
reading the first line, and seized the paper. His sight was
dimmed, his legs sank under him, and he would have fallen
had not Florentin supported him.
"Poor young man," said Monte Cristo in a low voice; "it is
then true that the sin of the father shall fall on the children to
the third and fourth generation." Meanwhile Albert had
revived, and, continuing to read, he threw back his head,
saying, "Florentin, is your horse fit to return immediately?"
"It is a poor lame post-horse."
"In what state was the house when you left?"

"All was quiet, but on returning from M. Beauchamp's, I
found madame in tears: she had sent for me to know when
There are words which close a conversation with an iron you would return. I told her my orders from M. Beauchamp;
door; such was the count's "yes." The whole journey was she first extended her arms to prevent me, but after a
performed with equal rapidity; the thirty-two horses, moment's reflection, `Yes, go, Florentin,' said she, `and may
dispersed over seven stages, brought them to their he come quickly.'"
destination in eight hours. At midnight they arrived at the
"Yes, my mother," said Albert, "I will return, and woe to the
gate of a beautiful park. The porter was in attendance; he
infamous wretch! But first of all I must get there."
had been apprised by the groom of the last stage of the
count's approach. At half past two in the morning Morcerf He went back to the room where he had left Monte Cristo.
was conducted to his apartments, where a bath and supper Five minutes had sufficed to make a complete
were prepared. The servant who had travelled at the back of transformation in his appearance. His voice had become
the carriage waited on him; Baptistin, who rode in front, rough and hoarse; his face was furrowed with wrinkles; his
attended the count. Albert bathed, took his supper, and went eyes burned under the blue-veined lids, and he tottered like
to bed. All night he was lulled by the melancholy noise of a drunken man. "Count," said he, "I thank you for your
the surf. On rising, he went to his window, which opened on hospitality, which I would gladly have enjoyed longer; but I
a terrace, having the sea in front, and at the back a pretty must return to Paris."
park bounded by a small forest. In a creek lay a little sloop, "What has happened?"
with a narrow keel and high masts, bearing on its flag the
Monte Cristo arms which were a mountain on a sea azure, "A great misfortune, more important to me than life. Don't
with a cross gules on the shield. Around the schooner lay a question me, I beg of you, but lend me a horse."
"Yes."

number of small fishing-boats belonging to the fishermen of
the neighboring village, like humble subjects awaiting orders
from their queen. There, as in every spot where Monte Cristo
stopped, if but for two days, luxury abounded and life went
on with the utmost ease.

"My stables are at your command, viscount; but you will kill
yourself by riding on horseback. Take a post-chaise or a
carriage."

"No, it would delay me, and I need the fatigue you warn me
of; it will do me good." Albert reeled as if he had been shot,
Albert found in his anteroom two guns, with all the and fell on a chair near the door. Monte Cristo did not see
accoutrements for hunting; a lofty room on the ground-floor this second manifestation of physical exhaustion; he was at
containing all the ingenious instruments the English -- the window, calling, "Ali, a horse for M. de Morcerf -- quick!
eminent in piscatory pursuits, since they are patient and he is in a hurry!" These words restored Albert; he darted
sluggish -- have invented for fishing. The day passed in from the room, followed by the count. "Thank you!" cried he,
pursuing those exercises in which Monte Cristo excelled. throwing himself on his horse. "Return as soon as you can,
They killed a dozen pheasants in the park, as many trout in Florentin. Must I use any password to procure a horse?"
354

"Only dismount; another will be immediately saddled."
Albert hesitated a moment. "You may think my departure
strange and foolish," said the young man; "you do not know
how a paragraph in a newspaper may exasperate one. Read
that," said he, "when I am gone, that you may not be witness
of my anger."

surrendered the castle of Yanina, but sold his benefactor to
the Turks, styled himself truly at that time Fernand, as our
esteemed contemporary states; but he has since added to his
Christian name a title of nobility and a family name. He now
calls himself the Count of Morcerf, and ranks among the
peers."

While the count picked up the paper he put spurs to his
horse, which leaped in astonishment at such an unusual
stimulus, and shot away with the rapidity of an arrow. The
count watched him with a feeling of compassion, and when
he had completely disappeared, read as follows: --

Thus the terrible secret, which Beauchamp had so
generously destroyed, appeared again like an armed
phantom; and another paper, deriving its information from
some malicious source, had published two days after
Albert's departure for Normandy the few lines which had
rendered the unfortunate young man almost crazy.

"The French officer in the service of Ali Pasha of Yanina
alluded to three weeks since in the Impartial, who not only

355


CHAPTER 86


Chapter 86

THE TRIAL

The Trial

A

t eight o'clock in the morning Albert had arrived at
Beauchamp's door. The valet de chambre had received
orders to usher him in at once. Beauchamp was in his bath.
"Here I am," said Albert.

namely, that the same day a great agitation was manifest in
the House of Peers among the usually calm members of that
dignified assembly. Every one had arrived almost before the
usual hour, and was conversing on the melancholy event
which was to attract the attention of the public towards one
"Well, my poor friend," replied Beauchamp, "I expected
of their most illustrious colleagues. Some were perusing the
you."
article, others making comments and recalling circumstances
"I need not say I think you are too faithful and too kind to which substantiated the charges still more. The Count of
have spoken of that painful circumstance. Your having sent Morcerf was no favorite with his colleagues. Like all upstarts,
for me is another proof of your affection. So, without losing he had had recourse to a great deal of haughtiness to
time, tell me, have you the slightest idea whence this terrible maintain his position. The true nobility laughed at him, the
blow proceeds?"
talented repelled him, and the honorable instinctively
despised him. He was, in fact, in the unhappy position of the
"I think I have some clew."
victim marked for sacrifice; the finger of God once pointed at
"But first tell me all the particulars of this shameful plot." him, every one was prepared to raise the hue and cry.
Beauchamp proceeded to relate to the young man, who was
overwhelmed with shame and grief, the following facts. Two The Count of Morcerf alone was ignorant of the news. He
days previously, the article had appeared in another paper did not take in the paper containing the defamatory article,
besides the Impartial, and, what was more serious, one that and had passed the morning in writing letters and in trying a
was well known as a government paper. Beauchamp was horse. He arrived at his usual hour, with a proud look and
breakfasting when he read the paragraph. He sent insolent demeanor; he alighted, passed through the corridors,
immediately for a cabriolet, and hastened to the publisher's and entered the house without observing the hesitation of
office. Although professing diametrically opposite principles the door-keepers or the coolness of his colleagues. Business
from those of the editor of the other paper, Beauchamp -- as had already been going on for half an hour when he entered.
it sometimes, we may say often, happens -- was his intimate Every one held the accusing paper, but, as usual, no one
friend. The editor was reading, with apparent delight, a liked to take upon himself the responsibility of the attack. At
leading article in the same paper on beet-sugar, probably a length an honorable peer, Morcerf's acknowledged enemy,
ascended the tribune with that solemnity which announced
composition of his own.
that the expected moment had arrived. There was an
"Ah, pardieu," said Beauchamp, "with the paper in your impressive silence; Morcerf alone knew not why such
hand, my friend, I need not tell you the cause of my visit."
profound attention was given to an orator who was not
"Are you interested in the sugar question?" asked the editor always listened to with so much complacency. The count did
not notice the introduction, in which the speaker announced
of the ministerial paper.
that his communication would be of that vital importance
"No," replied Beauchamp, "I have not considered the
that it demanded the undivided attention of the House; but
question; a totally different subject interests me."
at the mention of Yanina and Colonel Fernand, he turned so
"What is it?"
frightfully pale that every member shuddered and fixed his
eyes upon him. Moral wounds have this peculiarity, -- they
"The article relative to Morcerf."
may be hidden, but they never close; always painful, always
"Indeed? Is it not a curious affair?"
ready to bleed when touched, they remain fresh and open in
"So curious, that I think you are running a great risk of a the heart.
prosecution for defamation of character."
The article having been read during the painful hush that

followed, a universal shudder pervaded the assembly. and
immediately the closest attention was given to the orator as
he resumed his remarks. He stated his scruples and the
difficulties of the case; it was the honor of M. de Morcerf,
and that of the whole House, he proposed to defend, by
provoking a debate on personal questions, which are always
such painful themes of discussion. He concluded by calling
for an investigation, which might dispose of the calumnious
report before it had time to spread, and restore M. de
Morcerf to the position he had long held in public opinion.
Morcerf was so completely overwhelmed by this great and
unexpected calamity that he could scarcely stammer a few
"Oh, that is very simple; we have not sought to scandalize.
words as he looked around on the assembly. This timidity,
This news was brought to us. A man arrived yesterday from
which might proceed from the astonishment of innocence as
Yanina, bringing a formidable array of documents; and
well as the shame of guilt, conciliated some in his favor; for
when we hesitated to publish the accusatory article, he told
men who are truly generous are always ready to
us it should be inserted in some other paper."
compassionate when the misfortune of their enemy
Beauchamp understood that nothing remained but to submit, surpasses the limits of their hatred.
and left the office to despatch a courier to Morcerf. But he
The president put it to the vote, and it was decided that the
had been unable to send to Albert the following particulars,
investigation should take place. The count was asked what
as the events had transpired after the messenger's departure;
time he required to prepare his defence. Morcerf's courage
356
"Not at all; we have received with the information all the
requisite proofs, and we are quite sure M. de Morcerf will
not raise his voice against us; besides, it is rendering a
service to one's country to denounce these wretched
criminals who are unworthy of the honor bestowed on
them." Beauchamp was thunderstruck. "Who, then, has so
correctly informed you?" asked he; "for my paper, which
gave the first information on the subject, has been obliged to
stop for want of proof; and yet we are more interested than
you in exposing M. de Morcerf, as he is a peer of France, and
we are of the opposition."

had revived when he found himself alive after this horrible
blow. "My lords," answered he, "it is not by time I could
repel the attack made on me by enemies unknown to me,
and, doubtless, hidden in obscurity; it is immediately, and
by a thunderbolt, that I must repel the flash of lightning
which, for a moment, startled me. Oh, that I could, instead of
taking up this defence, shed my last drop of blood to prove
to my noble colleagues that I am their equal in worth." These
words made a favorable impression on behalf of the accused.
"I demand, then, that the examination shall take place as
soon as possible, and I will furnish the house with all
necessary information."

the count began his defence, I assure you, Albert, in a most
eloquent and skilful manner. He produced documents
proving that the Vizier of Yanina had up to the last moment
honored him with his entire confidence, since he had
interested him with a negotiation of life and death with the
emperor. He produced the ring, his mark of authority, with
which Ali Pasha generally sealed his letters, and which the
latter had given him, that he might, on his return at any hour
of the day or night, gain access to the presence, even in the
harem. Unfortunately, the negotiation failed, and when he
returned to defend his benefactor, he was dead. `But,' said
the count, `so great was Ali Pasha's confidence, that on his
death-bed he resigned his favorite mistress and her daughter
"What day do you fix?" asked the president.
to my care.'" Albert started on hearing these words; the
"To-day I am at your service," replied the count. The history of Haidee recurred to him, and he remembered what
president rang the bell. "Does the House approve that the she had said of that message and the ring, and the manner in
examination should take place to-day?"
which she had been sold and made a slave. "And what effect
did this discourse produce?" anxiously inquired Albert. "I
"Yes," was the unanimous answer.
acknowledge it affected me, and, indeed, all the committee
A committee of twelve members was chosen to examine the also," said Beauchamp.
proofs brought forward by Morcerf. The investigation would
begin at eight o'clock that evening in the committee-room, "Meanwhile, the president carelessly opened the letter which
and if postponement were necessary, the proceedings would had been brought to him; but the first lines aroused his
be resumed each evening at the same hour. Morcerf asked attention; he read them again and again, and fixing his eyes
leave to retire; he had to collect the documents he had long on M. de Morcerf, `Count,' said he, `you have said that the
been preparing against this storm, which his sagacity had Vizier of Yanina confided his wife and daughter to your
care?' -- `Yes, sir,' replied Morcerf; `but in that, like all the
foreseen.
rest, misfortune pursued me. On my return, Vasiliki and her
Albert listened, trembling now with hope, then with anger, daughter Haidee had disappeared.' -- `Did you know them?'
and then again with shame, for from Beauchamp's -- `My intimacy with the pasha and his unlimited confidence
confidence he knew his father was guilty, and he asked had gained me an introduction to them, and I had seen them
himself how, since he was guilty, he could prove his above twenty times.'
innocence. Beauchamp hesitated to continue his narrative.
"`Have you any idea what became of them?' -- `Yes, sir; I
"What next?" asked Albert.
heard they had fallen victims to their sorrow, and, perhaps,
"What next? My friend, you impose a painful task on me. to their poverty. I was not rich; my life was in constant
Must you know all?"
danger; I could not seek them, to my great regret.' The
president frowned imperceptibly. `Gentlemen,' said he, `you
"Absolutely; and rather from your lips than another's."
have heard the Comte de Morcerf's defence. Can you, sir,
"Muster up all your courage, then, for never have you
produce any witnesses to the truth of what you have
required it more." Albert passed his hand over his forehead,
asserted?' -- `Alas, no, monsieur,' replied the count; `all those
as if to try his strength, as a man who is preparing to defend
who surrounded the vizier, or who knew me at his court, are
his life proves his shield and bends his sword. He thought
either dead or gone away, I know not where. I believe that I
himself strong enough, for he mistook fever for energy. "Go
alone, of all my countrymen, survived that dreadful war. I
on," said he.
have only the letters of Ali Tepelini, which I have placed
"The evening arrived; all Paris was in expectation. Many said before you; the ring, a token of his good-will, which is here;
your father had only to show himself to crush the charge and, lastly, the most convincing proof I can offer, after an
against him; many others said he would not appear; while anonymous attack, and that is the absence of any witness
some asserted that they had seen him start for Brussels; and against my veracity and the purity of my military life.' A
others went to the police-office to inquire if he had taken out murmur of approbation ran through the assembly; and at
a passport. I used all my influence with one of the committee, this moment, Albert, had nothing more transpired, your
a young peer of my acquaintance, to get admission to one of father's cause had been gained. It only remained to put it to
the galleries. He called for me at seven o'clock, and, before the vote, when the president resumed: `Gentlemen and you,
any one had arrived, asked one of the door-keepers to place monsieur, -- you will not be displeased, I presume, to listen
me in a box. I was concealed by a column, and might witness to one who calls himself a very important witness, and who
the whole of the terrible scene which was about to take place. has just presented himself. He is, doubtless, come to prove
At eight o'clock all were in their places, and M. de Morcerf the perfect innocence of our colleague. Here is a letter I have
entered at the last stroke. He held some papers in his hand; just received on the subject; shall it be read, or shall it be
his countenance was calm, and his step firm, and he was passed over? and shall we take no notice of this incident?' M.
dressed with great care in his military uniform, which was de Morcerf turned pale, and clinched his hands on the
buttoned completely up to the chin. His presence produced a papers he held. The committee decided to hear the letter; the
good effect. The committee was made up of Liberals, several count was thoughtful and silent. The president read: -of whom came forward to shake hands with him."
"`Mr. President, -- I can furnish the committee of inquiry into
Albert felt his heart bursting at these particulars, but the conduct of the Lieutenant-General the Count of Morcerf
gratitude mingled with his sorrow: he would gladly have in Epirus and in Macedonia with important particulars.'
embraced those who had given his father this proof of
"The president paused, and the count turned pale. The
esteem at a moment when his honor was so powerfully
president looked at his auditors. `Proceed,' was heard on all
attacked. "At this moment one of the door-keepers brought
sides. The president resumed: -in a letter for the president. `You are at liberty to speak, M.
de Morcerf,' said the president, as he unsealed the letter; and "`I was on the spot at the death of Ali Pasha. I was present
357


CHAPTER 86

during his last moments. I know what is become of Vasiliki
and Haidee. I am at the command of the committee, and
even claim the honor of being heard. I shall be in the lobby
when this note is delivered to you.'
"`And who is this witness, or rather this enemy?' asked the
count, in a tone in which there was a visible alteration. `We
shall know, sir,' replied the president. `Is the committee
willing to hear this witness?' -- `Yes, yes,' they all said at
once. The door-keeper was called. `Is there any one in the
lobby?' said the president.
"`Yes, sir.' -- `Who is it?' -- `A woman, accompanied by a
servant.' Every one looked at his neighbor. `Bring her in,'
said the president. Five minutes after the door-keeper again
appeared; all eyes were fixed on the door, and I," said
Beauchamp, "shared the general expectation and anxiety.
Behind the door-keeper walked a woman enveloped in a
large veil, which completely concealed her. It was evident,
from her figure and the perfumes she had about her, that she
was young and fastidious in her tastes, but that was all. The
president requested her to throw aside her veil, and it was
then seen that she was dressed in the Grecian costume, and
was remarkably beautiful."

THE TRIAL
being brought up in my mother's faith, -- this latter has been
sealed by the grand primate of Macedonia and Epirus; and
lastly (and perhaps the most important), the record of the
sale of my person and that of my mother to the Armenian
merchant El-Kobbir, by the French officer, who, in his
infamous bargain with the Porte, had reserved as his part of
the booty the wife and daughter of his benefactor, whom he
sold for the sum of four hundred thousand francs.' A
greenish pallor spread over the count's cheeks, and his eyes
became bloodshot at these terrible imputations, which were
listened to by the assembly with ominous silence.
"Haidee, still calm, but with a calmness more dreadful than
the anger of another would have been, handed to the
president the record of her sale, written in Arabic. It had
been supposed some of the papers might be in the Arabian,
Romaic, or Turkish language, and the interpreter of the
House was in attendance. One of the noble peers, who was
familiar with the Arabic language, having studied it during
the famous Egyptian campaign, followed with his eye as the
translator read aloud: --

"`I, El-Kobbir, a slave-merchant, and purveyor of the harem
of his highness, acknowledge having received for
transmission to the sublime emperor, from the French lord,
"Ah," said Albert, "it was she."
the Count of Monte Cristo, an emerald valued at eight
"Who?"
hundred thousand francs; as the ransom of a young
Christian slave of eleven years of age, named Haidee, the
"Haidee."
acknowledged daughter of the late lord Ali Tepelini, pasha
"Who told you that?"
of Yanina, and of Vasiliki, his favorite; she having been sold
"Alas, I guess it. But go on, Beauchamp. You see I am calm to me seven years previously, with her mother, who had
and strong. And yet we must be drawing near the died on arriving at Constantinople, by a French colonel in
the service of the Vizier Ali Tepelini, named Fernand
disclosure."
Mondego. The above-mentioned purchase was made on his
"M. de Morcerf," continued Beauchamp, "looked at this
highness's account, whose mandate I had, for the sum of
woman with surprise and terror. Her lips were about to pass
four hundred thousand francs.
his sentence of life or death. To the committee the adventure
was so extraordinary and curious, that the interest they had "`Given at Constantinople, by authority of his highness, in
felt for the count's safety became now quite a secondary the year 1247 of the Hegira.
matter. The president himself advanced to place a seat for "`Signed El-Kobbir.'
the young lady; but she declined availing herself of it. As for
the count, he had fallen on his chair; it was evident that his "`That this record should have all due authority, it shall bear
the imperial seal, which the vendor is bound to have affixed
legs refused to support him.
to it.'
"`Madame,' said the president, `you have engaged to furnish
the committee with some important particulars respecting "Near the merchant's signature there was, indeed, the seal of
the affair at Yanina, and you have stated that you were an the sublime emperor. A dreadful silence followed the
eyewitness of the event.' -- `I was, indeed,' said the stranger, reading of this document; the count could only stare, and his
with a tone of sweet melancholy, and with the sonorous gaze, fixed as if unconsciously on Haidee, seemed one of fire
and blood. `Madame,' said the president, `may reference be
voice peculiar to the East.
made to the Count of Monte Cristo, who is now, I believe, in
"`But allow me to say that you must have been very young Paris?' -- `Sir,' replied Haidee, `the Count of Monte Cristo,
then.' -- `I was four years old; but as those events deeply my foster-father, has been in Normandy the last three days.'
concerned me, not a single detail has escaped my memory.'
-- `In what manner could these events concern you? and who "`Who, then, has counselled you to take this step, one for
are you, that they should have made so deep an impression which the court is deeply indebted to you, and which is
on you?' -- `On them depended my father's life,' replied she. perfectly natural, considering your birth and your
`I am Haidee, the daughter of Ali Tepelini, pasha of Yanina, misfortunes?' -- `Sir,' replied Haidee, `I have been led to take
this step from a feeling of respect and grief. Although a
and of Vasiliki, his beloved wife.'
Christian, may God forgive me, I have always sought to
"The blush of mingled pride and modesty which suddenly revenge my illustrious father. Since I set my foot in France,
suffused the cheeks of the young woman, the brilliancy of and knew the traitor lived in Paris, I have watched carefully.
her eye, and her highly important communication, produced I live retired in the house of my noble protector, but I do it
an indescribable effect on the assembly. As for the count, he from choice. I love retirement and silence, because I can live
could not have been more overwhelmed if a thunderbolt had with my thoughts and recollections of past days. But the
fallen at his feet and opened an immense gulf before him. Count of Monte Cristo surrounds me with every paternal
`Madame,' replied the president, bowing with profound care, and I am ignorant of nothing which passes in the world.
respect, `allow me to ask one question; it shall be the last: I learn all in the silence of my apartments, -- for instance, I
Can you prove the authenticity of what you have now see all the newspapers, every periodical, as well as every
stated?' -- `I can, sir,' said Haidee, drawing from under her new piece of music; and by thus watching the course of the
veil a satin satchel highly perfumed; `for here is the register life of others, I learned what had transpired this morning in
of my birth, signed by my father and his principal officers, the House of Peers, and what was to take place this evening;
and that of my baptism, my father having consented to my
358

then I wrote.'

fell like a dagger on Morcerf, and deprived him of a portion
of his energy; as she uttered the last, he hid his mutilated
"`Then,' remarked the president, `the Count of Monte Cristo
hand hastily in his bosom, and fell back on his seat,
knows nothing of your present proceedings?' -- `He is quite
overwhelmed by wretchedness and despair. This scene
unaware of them, and I have but one fear, which is that he
completely changed the opinion of the assembly respecting
should disapprove of what I have done. But it is a glorious
the accused count.
day for me,' continued the young girl, raising her ardent
gaze to heaven, `that on which I find at last an opportunity "`Count of Morcerf,' said the president, `do not allow
of avenging my father!'
yourself to be cast down; answer. The justice of the court is
supreme and impartial as that of God; it will not suffer you
"The count had not uttered one word the whole of this time.
to be trampled on by your enemies without giving you an
His colleagues looked at him, and doubtless pitied his
opportunity of defending yourself. Shall further inquiries be
prospects, blighted under the perfumed breath of a woman.
made? Shall two members of the House be sent to Yanina?
His misery was depicted in sinister lines on his countenance.
Speak!' Morcerf did not reply. Then all the members looked
`M. de Morcerf,' said the president, `do you recognize this
at each other with terror. They knew the count's energetic
lady as the daughter of Ali Tepelini, pasha of Yanina?' -and violent temper; it must be, indeed, a dreadful blow
`No,' said Morcerf, attempting to rise, `it is a base plot,
which would deprive him of courage to defend himself.
contrived by my enemies.' Haidee, whose eyes had been
They expected that his stupefied silence would be followed
fixed on the door, as if expecting some one, turned hastily,
by a fiery outburst. `Well,' asked the president, `what is your
and, seeing the count standing, shrieked, `You do not know
decision?'
me?' said she. `Well, I fortunately recognize you! You are
Fernand Mondego, the French officer who led the troops of "`I have no reply to make,' said the count in a low tone.
my noble father! It is you who surrendered the castle of
"`Has the daughter of Ali Tepelini spoken the truth?' said the
Yanina! It is you who, sent by him to Constantinople, to treat
president. `Is she, then, the terrible witness to whose charge
with the emperor for the life or death of your benefactor,
you dare not plead "Not guilty"? Have you really committed
brought back a false mandate granting full pardon! It is you
the crimes of which you are accused?' The count looked
who, with that mandate, obtained the pasha's ring, which
around him with an expression which might have softened
gave you authority over Selim, the fire-keeper! It is you who
tigers, but which could not disarm his judges. Then he raised
stabbed Selim. It is you who sold us, my mother and me, to
his eyes towards the ceiling, but withdrew then,
the merchant, El-Kobbir! Assassin, assassin, assassin, you
immediately, as if he feared the roof would open and reveal
have still on your brow your master's blood! Look,
to his distressed view that second tribunal called heaven,
gentlemen, all!'
and that other judge named God. Then, with a hasty
"These words had been pronounced with such enthusiasm movement, he tore open his coat, which seemed to stifle him,
and evident truth, that every eye was fixed on the count's and flew from the room like a madman; his footstep was
forehead, and he himself passed his hand across it, as if he heard one moment in the corridor, then the rattling of his
felt Ali's blood still lingering there. `You positively recognize carriage-wheels as he was driven rapidly away. `Gentlemen,'
M. de Morcerf as the officer, Fernand Mondego?' -- `Indeed I said the president, when silence was restored, `is the Count
do!' cried Haidee. `Oh, my mother, it was you who said, of Morcerf convicted of felony, treason, and conduct
"You were free, you had a beloved father, you were destined unbecoming a member of this House?' -- `Yes,' replied all the
to be almost a queen. Look well at that man; it is he who members of the committee of inquiry with a unanimous
raised your father's head on the point of a spear; it is he who voice.
sold us; it is he who forsook us! Look well at his right hand,
"Haidee had remained until the close of the meeting. She
on which he has a large wound; if you forgot his features,
heard the count's sentence pronounced without betraying an
you would know him by that hand, into which fell, one by
expression of joy or pity; then drawing her veil over her face
one, the gold pieces of the merchant El-Kobbir!" I know him!
she bowed majestically to the councillors, and left with that
Ah, let him say now if he does not recognize me!' Each word
dignified step which Virgil attributes to his goddesses."

359


CHAPTER 87


Chapter 87

THE CHALLENGE

The Challenge

"T

hen," continued Beauchamp, "I took advantage of the
silence and the darkness to leave the house without
being seen. The usher who had introduced me was waiting
for me at the door, and he conducted me through the
corridors to a private entrance opening into the Rue de
Vaugirard. I left with mingled feelings of sorrow and delight.
Excuse me, Albert, -- sorrow on your account, and delight
with that noble girl, thus pursuing paternal vengeance. Yes,
Albert, from whatever source the blow may have proceeded
-- it may be from an enemy, but that enemy is only the agent
of providence." Albert held his head between his hands; he
raised his face, red with shame and bathed in tears, and
seizing Beauchamp's arm, "My friend," said he, "my life is
ended. I cannot calmly say with you, `Providence has struck
the blow;' but I must discover who pursues me with this
hatred, and when I have found him I shall kill him, or he will
kill me. I rely on your friendship to assist me, Beauchamp, if
contempt has not banished it from your heart."

"Tell me; satisfy my impatience."

"Contempt, my friend? How does this misfortune affect you?
No, happily that unjust prejudice is forgotten which made
the son responsible for the father's actions. Review your life,
Albert; although it is only just beginning, did a lovely
summer's day ever dawn with greater purity than has
marked the commencement of your career? No, Albert, take
my advice. You are young and rich -- leave Paris -- all is soon
forgotten in this great Babylon of excitement and changing
tastes. You will return after three or four years with a
Russian princess for a bride, and no one will think more of
what occurred yesterday than if it had happened sixteen
years ago."

"He!" cried Albert; "yes, it is indeed he who has so long
pursued my father with jealous hatred. He, the man who
would be popular, cannot forgive the Count of Morcerf for
being created a peer; and this marriage broken off without a
reason being assigned -- yes, it is all from the same cause."

"Thank you, my dear Beauchamp, thank you for the
excellent feeling which prompts your advice; but it cannot be.
I have told you my wish, or rather my determination. You
understand that, interested as I am in this affair, I cannot see
it in the same light as you do. What appears to you to
emanate from a celestial source, seems to me to proceed
from one far less pure. Providence appears to me to have no
share in this affair; and happily so, for instead of the
invisible, impalpable agent of celestial rewards and
punishments, I shall find one both palpable and visible, on
whom I shall revenge myself, I assure you, for all I have
suffered during the last month. Now, I repeat, Beauchamp, I
wish to return to human and material existence, and if you
are still the friend you profess to be, help me to discover the
hand that struck the blow."

"Well, I will tell you what I did not like to mention on my
return from Yanina."
"Say on."
"I went, of course, to the chief banker of the town to make
inquiries. At the first word, before I had even mentioned
your father's name" -"`Ah,' said he. `I guess what brings you here.'
"`How, and why?'
"`Because a fortnight since I was questioned on the same
subject.'
"`By whom?' -- `By a Paris banker, my correspondent.'
"`Whose name is' -"`Danglars.'"

"Make inquiries, Albert, but do not be angry without reason;
make inquiries, and if it be true" -"Oh, yes, if it be true," cried the young man, "he shall pay me
all I have suffered."
"Beware, Morcerf, he is already an old man."
"I will respect his age as he has respected the honor of my
family; if my father had offended him, why did he not attack
him personally? Oh, no, he was afraid to encounter him face
to face."
"I do not condemn you, Albert; I only restrain you. Act
prudently."
"Oh, do not fear; besides, you will accompany me.
Beauchamp, solemn transactions should be sanctioned by a
witness. Before this day closes, if M. Danglars is guilty, he
shall cease to live, or I shall die. Pardieu, Beauchamp, mine
shall be a splendid funeral!"

"When such resolutions are made, Albert, they should be
promptly executed. Do you wish to go to M. Danglars? Let
us go immediately." They sent for a cabriolet. On entering
the banker's mansion, they perceived the phaeton and
"Be it so," said Beauchamp; "if you must have me descend to servant of M. Andrea Cavalcanti. "Ah, parbleu, that's good,"
earth, I submit; and if you will seek your enemy, I will assist said Albert, with a gloomy tone. "If M. Danglars will not
you, and I will engage to find him, my honor being almost as fight with me, I will kill his son-in-law; Cavalcanti will
certainly fight." The servant announced the young man; but
deeply interested as yours."
the banker, recollecting what had transpired the day before,
"Well, then, you understand, Beauchamp, that we begin our
did not wish him admitted. It was, however, too late; Albert
search immediately. Each moment's delay is an eternity for
had followed the footman, and, hearing the order given,
me. The calumniator is not yet punished, and he may hope
forced the door open, and followed by Beauchamp found
that he will not be; but, on my honor, it he thinks so, he
himself in the banker's study. "Sir," cried the latter, "am I no
deceives himself."
longer at liberty to receive whom I choose in my house? You
appear to forget yourself sadly."
"Well, listen, Morcerf."
"Ah, Beauchamp, I see you know something already; you
will restore me to life."
"I do not say there is any truth in what I am going to tell you,
but it is, at least, a ray of light in a dark night; by following it
we may, perhaps, discover something more certain."
360

"No, sir," said Albert, coldly; "there are circumstances in
which one cannot, except through cowardice, -- I offer you
that refuge, -- refuse to admit certain persons at least."
"What is your errand, then, with me, sir?"
"I mean," said Albert, drawing near, and without apparently

noticing Cavalcanti, who stood with his back towards the
fireplace -- "I mean to propose a meeting in some retired
corner where no one will interrupt us for ten minutes; that
will be sufficient -- where two men having met, one of them
will remain on the ground." Danglars turned pale;
Cavalcanti moved a step forward, and Albert turned
towards him. "And you, too," said he, "come, if you like,
monsieur; you have a claim, being almost one of the family,
and I will give as many rendezvous of that kind as I can find
persons willing to accept them." Cavalcanti looked at
Danglars with a stupefied air, and the latter, making an
effort, arose and stepped between the two young men.
Albert's attack on Andrea had placed him on a different
footing, and he hoped this visit had another cause than that
he had at first supposed.

speaking of your father's past history. I said the origin of his
fortune remained obscure. The person to whom I addressed
my scruples asked me where your father had acquired his
property? I answered, `In Greece.' -- `Then,' said he, `write to
Yanina.'"

"Indeed, sir," said he to Albert, "if you are come to quarrel
with this gentleman because I have preferred him to you, I
shall resign the case to the king's attorney."

"I accuse no one, sir," said Danglars; "I relate, and I will
repeat before the count what I have said to you."

"You mistake, sir," said Morcerf with a gloomy smile; "I am
not referring in the least to matrimony, and I only addressed
myself to M. Cavalcanti because he appeared disposed to
interfere between us. In one respect you are right, for I am
ready to quarrel with every one to-day; but you have the
first claim, M. Danglars."

"Yes; I showed it to him."

"And who thus advised you?"
"No other than your friend, Monte Cristo."
"The Count of Monte Cristo told you to write to Yanina?"
"Yes; and I wrote, and will show you my correspondence, if
you like." Albert and Beauchamp looked at each other. "Sir,"
said Beauchamp, who had not yet spoken, "you appear to
accuse the count, who is absent from Paris at this moment,
and cannot justify himself."

"Does the count know what answer you received?"
"Did he know my father's Christian name was Fernand, and
his family name Mondego?"

"Yes, I had told him that long since, and I did only what any
other would have done in my circumstances, and perhaps
less. When, the day after the arrival of this answer, your
"Sir," replied Danglars, pale with anger and fear, "I warn you,
father came by the advice of Monte Cristo to ask my
when I have the misfortune to meet with a mad dog, I kill it;
daughter's hand for you, I decidedly refused him, but
and far from thinking myself guilty of a crime, I believe I do
without any explanation or exposure. In short, why should I
society a kindness. Now, if you are mad and try to bite me, I
have any more to do with the affair? How did the honor or
will kill you without pity. Is it my fault that your father has
disgrace of M. de Morcerf affect me? It neither increased nor
dishonored himself?"
decreased my income."
"Yes, miserable wretch!" cried Morcerf, "it is your fault."
Albert felt the blood mounting to his brow; there was no
Danglars retreated a few steps. "My fault?" said he; "you
doubt upon the subject. Danglars defended himself with the
must be mad! What do I know of the Grecian affair? Have I
baseness, but at the same time with the assurance, of a man
travelled in that country? Did I advise your father to sell the
who speaks the truth, at least in part, if not wholly -- not for
castle of Yanina -- to betray" -conscience' sake, but through fear. Besides, what was
"Silence!" said Albert, with a thundering voice. "No; it is not Morcerf seeking? It was not whether Danglars or Monte
you who have directly made this exposure and brought this Cristo was more or less guilty; it was a man who would
sorrow on us, but you hypocritically provoked it."
answer for the offence, whether trifling or serious; it was a
man who would fight, and it was evident Danglars's would
"I?"
not fight. And, in addition to this, everything forgotten or
"Yes; you! How came it known?"
unperceived before presented itself now to his recollection.
"I suppose you read it in the paper in the account from Monte Cristo knew everything, as he had bought the
daughter of Ali Pasha; and, knowing everything, he had
Yanina?"
advised Danglars to write to Yanina. The answer known, he
"Who wrote to Yanina?"
had yielded to Albert's wish to be introduced to Haidee, and
"To Yanina?"
allowed the conversation to turn on the death of Ali, and had
not opposed Haidee's recital (but having, doubtless, warned
"Yes. Who wrote for particulars concerning my father?"
the young girl, in the few Romaic words he spoke to her, not
"I imagine any one may write to Yanina."
to implicate Morcerf's father). Besides, had he not begged of
Morcerf not to mention his father's name before Haidee?
"But one person only wrote!"
Lastly, he had taken Albert to Normandy when he knew the
"One only?"
final blow was near. There could be no doubt that all had
been calculated and previously arranged; Monte Cristo then
"Yes; and that was you!"
was in league with his father's enemies. Albert took
"I, doubtless, wrote. It appears to me that when about to
Beauchamp aside, and communicated these ideas to him.
marry your daughter to a young man, it is right to make
some inquiries respecting his family; it is not only a right, "You are right," said the latter; "M. Danglars has only been a
secondary agent in this sad affair, and it is of M. de Monte
but a duty."
Cristo that you must demand an explanation." Albert turned.
"You wrote, sir, knowing what answer you would receive."
"Sir," said he to Danglars, "understand that I do not take a
"I, indeed? I assure you," cried Danglars, with a confidence final leave of you; I must ascertain if your insinuations are
and security proceeding less from fear than from the interest just, and am going now to inquire of the Count of Monte
he really felt for the young man, "I solemnly declare to you, Cristo." He bowed to the banker, and went out with
that I should never have thought of writing to Yanina, did I Beauchamp, without appearing to notice Cavalcanti.
know anything of Ali Pasha's misfortunes."
Danglars accompanied him to the door, where he again
assured Albert that no motive of personal hatred had
"Who, then, urged you to write? Tell me."
influenced him against the Count of Morcerf.T
"Pardieu, it was the most simple thing in the world. I was
361


CHAPTER 88


Chapter 88

THE INSULT

The Insult

A

t the banker's door Beauchamp stopped Morcerf.
"Listen," said he; "just now I told you it was of M. de
Monte Cristo you must demand an explanation."

Beauchamp availed himself of Albert's permission, and left
him, promising to call for him at a quarter before eight. On
his return home, Albert expressed his wish to Franz Debray,
and Morrel, to see them at the opera that evening. Then he
"Yes; and we are going to his house."
went to see his mother, who since the events of the day
"Reflect, Morcerf, one moment before you go."
before had refused to see any one, and had kept her room.
He found her in bed, overwhelmed with grief at this public
"On what shall I reflect?"
humiliation. The sight of Albert produced the effect which
"On the importance of the step you are taking."
might naturally be expected on Mercedes; she pressed her
son's hand and sobbed aloud, but her tears relieved her.
"Is it more serious than going to M. Danglars?"
Albert stood one moment speechless by the side of his
"Yes; M. Danglars is a money-lover, and those who love
mother's bed. It was evident from his pale face and knit
money, you know, think too much of what they risk to be
brows that his resolution to revenge himself was growing
easily induced to fight a duel. The other is, on the contrary,
weaker. "My dear mother," said he, "do you know if M. de
to all appearance a true nobleman; but do you not fear to
Morcerf has any enemy?" Mercedes started; she noticed that
find him a bully?"
the young man did not say "my father." "My son," she said,
"I only fear one thing; namely, to find a man who will not "persons in the count's situation have many secret enemies.
fight."
Those who are known are not the most dangerous."
"Do not be alarmed," said Beauchamp; "he will meet you. My
only fear is that he will be too strong for you."

"I know it, and appeal to your penetration. You are of so
superior a mind, nothing escapes you."

"My friend," said Morcerf, with a sweet smile, "that is what I "Why do you say so?"
wish. The happiest thing that could occur to me, would be to
"Because, for instance, you noticed on the evening of the ball
die in my father's stead; that would save us all."
we gave, that M. de Monte Cristo would eat nothing in our
"Your mother would die of grief."
house." Mercedes raised herself on her feverish arm. "M. de
"My poor mother!" said Albert, passing his hand across his Monte Cristo!" she exclaimed; "and how is he connected with
the question you asked me?"
eyes, "I know she would; but better so than die of shame."
"Are you quite decided, Albert?"
"Yes; let us go."
"But do you think we shall find the count at home?"

"You know, mother, M. de Monte Cristo is almost an
Oriental, and it is customary with the Orientals to secure full
liberty for revenge by not eating or drinking in the houses of
their enemies."

"He intended returning some hours after me, and doubtless
he is now at home." They ordered the driver to take them to
No. 30 Champs-Elysees. Beauchamp wished to go in alone,
but Albert observed that as this was an unusual
circumstance he might be allowed to deviate from the usual
etiquette in affairs of honor. The cause which the young man
espoused was one so sacred that Beauchamp had only to
comply with all his wishes; he yielded and contented himself
with following Morcerf. Albert sprang from the porter's
lodge to the steps. He was received by Baptistin. The count
had, indeed, just arrived, but he was in his bath, and had
forbidden that any one should be admitted. "But after his
bath?" asked Morcerf.

"Do you say M. de Monte Cristo is our enemy?" replied
Mercedes, becoming paler than the sheet which covered her.
"Who told you so? Why, you are mad, Albert! M. de Monte
Cristo has only shown us kindness. M. de Monte Cristo
saved your life; you yourself presented him to us. Oh, I
entreat you, my son, if you had entertained such an idea,
dispel it; and my counsel to you -- nay, my prayer -- is to
retain his friendship."

"My master will go to dinner."

"Yes, doubtless; and is it not that he may never do us any
harm?" Mercedes shuddered, and, fixing on her son a
scrutinizing gaze, "You speak strangely," said she to Albert,
"and you appear to have some singular prejudices. What has
the count done? Three days since you were with him in
Normandy; only three days since we looked on him as our
best friend."

"And after dinner?"
"He will sleep an hour."
"Then?"
"He is going to the opera."
"Are you sure of it?" asked Albert.

"Mother," replied the young man, "you have especial reasons
for telling me to conciliate that man."
"I?" said Mercedes, blushing as rapidly as she had turned
pale, and again becoming paler than ever.

An ironical smile passed over Albert's lips. Mercedes saw it
and with the double instinct of woman and mother guessed
"Quite, sir; my master has ordered his horses at eight o'clock
all; but as she was prudent and strong-minded she concealed
precisely."
both her sorrows and her fears. Albert was silent; an instant
"Very good," replied Albert; "that is all I wished to know." after, the countess resumed: "You came to inquire after my
Then, turning towards Beauchamp, "If you have anything to health; I will candidly acknowledge that I am not well. You
attend to, Beauchamp, do it directly; if you have any should install yourself here, and cheer my solitude. I do not
appointment for this evening, defer it till tomorrow. I wish to be left alone."
depend on you to accompany me to the opera; and if you
"Mother," said the young man, "you know how gladly I
can, bring Chateau-Renaud with you."
would obey your wish, but an urgent and important affair
362

obliges me to leave you for the whole evening."

man's trembling voice was scarcely audible. "An explanation
at the opera?" said the count, with that calm tone and
"Well," replied Mercedes, sighing, "go, Albert; I will not
penetrating eye which characterize the man who knows his
make you a slave to your filial piety." Albert pretended he
cause is good. "Little acquainted as I am with the habits of
did not hear, bowed to his mother, and quitted her. Scarcely
Parisians, I should not have thought this the place for such a
had he shut her door, when Mercedes called a confidential
demand."
servant, and ordered him to follow Albert wherever he
should go that evening, and to come and tell her "Still, if people will shut themselves up," said Albert, "and
immediately what he observed. Then she rang for her lady's cannot be seen because they are bathing, dining, or asleep,
maid, and, weak as she was, she dressed, in order to be we must avail ourselves of the opportunity whenever they
ready for whatever might happen. The footman's mission are to be seen."
was an easy one. Albert went to his room, and dressed with
"I am not difficult of access, sir; for yesterday, if my memory
unusual care. At ten minutes to eight Beauchamp arrived; he
does not deceive me, you were at my house."
had seen Chateau-Renaud, who had promised to be in the
orchestra before the curtain was raised. Both got into Albert's "Yesterday I was at your house, sir," said the young man;
coupe; and, as the young man had no reason to conceal "because then I knew not who you were." In pronouncing
where he was going, he called aloud, "To the opera." In his these words Albert had raised his voice so as to be heard by
impatience he arrived before the beginning of the those in the adjoining boxes and in the lobby. Thus the
attention of many was attracted by this altercation. "Where
performance.
are you come from, sir? You do not appear to be in the
Chateau-Renaud was at his post; apprised by Beauchamp of
possession of your senses."
the circumstances, he required no explanation from Albert.
The conduct of the son in seeking to avenge his father was so "Provided I understand your perfidy, sir, and succeed in
natural that Chateau-Renaud did not seek to dissuade him, making you understand that I will be revenged, I shall be
and was content with renewing his assurances of devotion. reasonable enough," said Albert furiously.
Debray was not yet come, but Albert knew that he seldom "I do not understand you, sir," replied Monte Cristo; "and if I
lost a scene at the opera. Albert wandered about the theatre did, your tone is too high. I am at home here, and I alone
until the curtain was drawn up. He hoped to meet with M. have a right to raise my voice above another's. Leave the box,
de Monte Cristo either in the lobby or on the stairs. The bell sir!" Monte Cristo pointed towards the door with the most
summoned him to his seat, and he entered the orchestra with commanding dignity. "Ah, I shall know how to make you
Chateau-Renaud and Beauchamp. But his eyes scarcely leave your home!" replied Albert, clasping in his convulsed
quitted the box between the columns, which remained grasp the glove, which Monte Cristo did not lose sight of.
obstinately closed during the whole of the first act. At last, as
Albert was looking at his watch for about the hundredth "Well, well," said Monte Cristo quietly, "I see you wish to
time, at the beginning of the second act the door opened, and quarrel with me; but I would give you one piece of advice,
Monte Cristo entered, dressed in black, and, leaning over the which you will do well to keep in mind. It is in poor taste to
front of the box, looked around the pit. Morrel followed him, make a display of a challenge. Display is not becoming to
and looked also for his sister and brother in-law; he soon every one, M. de Morcerf."
discovered them in another box, and kissed his hand to
them.

At this name a murmur of astonishment passed around the
group of spectators of this scene. They had talked of no one
The count, in his survey of the pit, encountered a pale face but Morcerf the whole day. Albert understood the allusion in
and threatening eyes, which evidently sought to gain his a moment, and was about to throw his glove at the count,
attention. He recognized Albert, but thought it better not to when Morrel seized his hand, while Beauchamp and
notice him, as he looked so angry and discomposed. Without Chateau-Renaud, fearing the scene would surpass the limits
communicating his thoughts to his companion, he sat down, of a challenge, held him back. But Monte Cristo, without
drew out his opera-glass, and looked another way. Although rising, and leaning forward in his chair, merely stretched out
apparently not noticing Albert, he did not, however, lose his arm and, taking the damp, crushed glove from the
sight of him, and when the curtain fell at the end of the clinched hand of the young man, "Sir," said he in a solemn
second act, he saw him leave the orchestra with his two tone, "I consider your glove thrown, and will return it to you
friends. Then his head was seen passing at the back of the wrapped around a bullet. Now leave me or I will summon
boxes, and the count knew that the approaching storm was my servants to throw you out at the door."
intended to fall on him. He was at the moment conversing Wild, almost unconscious, and with eyes inflamed, Albert
cheerfully with Morrel, but he was well prepared for what stepped back, and Morrel closed the door. Monte Cristo took
might happen. The door opened, and Monte Cristo, turning up his glass again as if nothing had happened; his face was
round, saw Albert, pale and trembling, followed by like marble, and his heart was like bronze. Morrel whispered,
Beauchamp and Chateau-Renaud.
"What have you done to him?"
"Well," cried he, with that benevolent politeness which
distinguished his salutation from the common civilities of
the world, "my cavalier has attained his object.
Good-evening, M. de Morcerf." The countenance of this man,
who possessed such extraordinary control over his feelings,
expressed the most perfect cordiality. Morrel only then
recollected the letter he had received from the viscount, in
which, without assigning any reason, he begged him to go to
the opera, but he understood that something terrible was
brooding.

"I? Nothing -- at least personally," said Monte Cristo.
"But there must be some cause for this strange scene."
"The Count of Morcerf's adventure exasperates the young
man."
"Have you anything to do with it?"
"It was through Haidee that the Chamber was informed of
his father's treason."

"Indeed?" said Morrel. "I had been told, but would not credit
"We are not come here, sir, to exchange hypocritical it, that the Grecian slave I have seen with you here in this
expressions of politeness, or false professions of friendship," very box was the daughter of Ali Pasha."
said Albert, "but to demand an explanation." The young "It is true, nevertheless."
363


CHAPTER 88

"Then," said Morrel, "I understand it all, and this scene was
premeditated."
"How so?"
"Yes. Albert wrote to request me to come to the opera,
doubtless that I might be a witness to the insult he meant to
offer you."
"Probably," said Monte Cristo with his imperturbable
tranquillity.
"But what shall you do with him?"
"With whom?"
"With Albert."
"What shall I do with Albert? As certainly, Maximilian, as I
now press your hand, I shall kill him before ten o'clock
to-morrow morning." Morrel, in his turn, took Monte
Cristo's hand in both of his, and he shuddered to feel how
cold and steady it was.
"Ah, Count," said he, "his father loves him so much!"

THE INSULT
Monte Cristo bows to none but the Count of Monte Cristo
himself. Say no more, I entreat you. I do what I please, M.
Beauchamp, and it is always well done."
"Sir," replied the young man, "honest men are not to be paid
with such coin. I require honorable guaranties."
"I am, sir, a living guaranty," replied Monte Cristo,
motionless, but with a threatening look; "we have both blood
in our veins which we wish to shed -- that is our mutual
guaranty. Tell the viscount so, and that to-morrow, before
ten o'clock, I shall see what color his is."
"Then I have only to make arrangements for the duel," said
Beauchamp.
"It is quite immaterial to me," said Monte Cristo, "and it was
very unnecessary to disturb me at the opera for such a trifle.
In France people fight with the sword or pistol, in the
colonies with the carbine, in Arabia with the dagger. Tell
your client that, although I am the insulted party, in order to
carry out my eccentricity, I leave him the choice of arms, and
will accept without discussion, without dispute, anything,
even combat by drawing lots, which is always stupid, but
with me different from other people, as I am sure to gain."

"Do not speak to me of that," said Monte Cristo, with the first
movement of anger he had betrayed; "I will make him
suffer." Morrel, amazed, let fall Monte Cristo's hand. "Count, "Sure to gain!" repeated Beauchamp, looking with
count!" said he.
amazement at the count.
"Dear Maximilian," interrupted the count, "listen how "Certainly," said Monte Cristo, slightly shrugging his
adorably Duprez is singing that line, -shoulders; "otherwise I would not fight with M. de Morcerf. I
`O Mathilde! idole de mon ame!'
"I was the first to discover Duprez at Naples, and the first to
applaud him. Bravo, bravo!" Morrel saw it was useless to say
more, and refrained. The curtain, which had risen at the
close of the scene with Albert, again fell, and a rap was heard
at the door.
"Come in," said Monte Cristo with a voice that betrayed not
the least emotion; and immediately Beauchamp appeared.
"Good-evening, M. Beauchamp," said Monte Cristo, as if this
was the first time he had seen the journalist that evening; "be
seated."

shall kill him -- I cannot help it. Only by a single line this
evening at my house let me know the arms and the hour; I
do not like to be kept waiting."
"Pistols, then, at eight o'clock, in the Bois de Vincennes," said
Beauchamp, quite disconcerted, not knowing if he was
dealing with an arrogant braggadocio or a supernatural
being.

"Very well, sir," said Monte Cristo. "Now all that is settled,
do let me see the performance, and tell your friend Albert
not to come any more this evening; he will hurt himself with
all his ill-chosen barbarisms: let him go home and go to
sleep." Beauchamp left the box, perfectly amazed. "Now,"
Beauchamp bowed, and, sitting down, "Sir," said he, "I just
said Monte Cristo, turning towards Morrel, "I may depend
now accompanied M. de Morcerf, as you saw."
upon you, may I not?"
"And that means," replied Monte Cristo, laughing, "that you
"Certainly," said Morrel, "I am at your service, count; still" -had, probably, just dined together. I am happy to see, M.
"What?"
Beauchamp, that you are more sober than he was."
"Sir," said M. Beauchamp, "Albert was wrong, I acknowledge,
to betray so much anger, and I come, on my own account, to
apologize for him. And having done so, entirely on my own
account, be it understood, I would add that I believe you too
gentlemanly to refuse giving him some explanation
concerning your connection with Yanina. Then I will add
two words about the young Greek girl." Monte Cristo
motioned him to be silent. "Come," said he, laughing, "there
are all my hopes about to be destroyed."
"How so?" asked Beauchamp.
"Doubtless you wish to make me appear a very eccentric
character. I am, in your opinion, a Lara, a Manfred, a Lord
Ruthven; then, just as I am arriving at the climax, you defeat
your own end, and seek to make an ordinary man of me.
You bring me down to your own level, and demand
explanations! Indeed, M. Beauchamp, it is quite laughable."

"It is desirable I should know the real cause."
"That is to say, you would rather not?"
"No."
"The young man himself is acting blindfolded, and knows
not the true cause, which is known only to God and to me;
but I give you my word, Morrel, that God, who does know it,
will be on our side."
"Enough," said Morrel; "who is your second witness?"
"I know no one in Paris, Morrel, on whom I could confer that
honor besides you and your brother Emmanuel. Do you
think Emmanuel would oblige me?"
"I will answer for him, count."
"Well? that is all I require. To-morrow morning, at seven
o'clock, you will be with me, will you not?"

"Yet," replied Beauchamp haughtily, "there are occasions "We will."
when probity commands" -"Hush, the curtain is rising. Listen! I never lose a note of this
"M. Beauchamp," interposed this strange man, "the Count of opera if I can avoid it; the music of William Tell is so sweet."

364


Chapter 89

A Nocturnal Interview

M

onte Cristo waited, according to his usual custom,
until Duprez had sung his famous "Suivez-moi;" then
he rose and went out. Morrel took leave of him at the door,
renewing his promise to be with him the next morning at
seven o'clock, and to bring Emmanuel. Then he stepped into
his coupe, calm and smiling, and was at home in five
minutes. No one who knew the count could mistake his
expression when, on entering, he said, "Ali, bring me my
pistols with the ivory cross."
Ali brought the box to his master, who examined the
weapons with a solicitude very natural to a man who is
about to intrust his life to a little powder and shot. These
were pistols of an especial pattern, which Monte Cristo had
had made for target practice in his own room. A cap was
sufficient to drive out the bullet, and from the adjoining
room no one would have suspected that the count was, as
sportsmen would say, keeping his hand in. He was just
taking one up and looking for the point to aim at on a little
iron plate which served him as a target, when his study door
opened, and Baptistin entered. Before he had spoken a word,
the count saw in the next room a veiled woman, who had
followed closely after Baptistin, and now, seeing the count
with a pistol in his hand and swords on the table, rushed in.
Baptistin looked at his master, who made a sign to him, and
he went out, closing the door after him. "Who are you,
madame?" said the count to the veiled woman.
The stranger cast one look around her, to be certain that they
were quite alone; then bending as if she would have knelt,
and joining her hands, she said with an accent of despair,
"Edmond, you will not kill my son?" The count retreated a
step, uttered a slight exclamation, and let fall the pistol he
held. "What name did you pronounce then, Madame de
Morcerf?" said he. "Yours!" cried she, throwing back her veil,
-- "yours, which I alone, perhaps, have not forgotten.
Edmond, it is not Madame de Morcerf who is come to you, it
is Mercedes."

"You have seen that he would have thrown his glove in my
face if Morrel, one of my friends, had not stopped him."
"Listen to me, my son has also guessed who you are, -- he
attributes his father's misfortunes to you."
"Madame, you are mistaken, they are not misfortunes, -- it is
a punishment. It is not I who strike M. de Morcerf; it is
providence which punishes him."
"And why do you represent providence?" cried Mercedes.
"Why do you remember when it forgets? What are Yanina
and its vizier to you, Edmond? What injury his Fernand
Mondego done you in betraying Ali Tepelini?"
"Ah, madame," replied Monte Cristo, "all this is an affair
between the French captain and the daughter of Vasiliki. It
does not concern me, you are right; and if I have sworn to
revenge myself, it is not on the French captain, or the Count
of Morcerf, but on the fisherman Fernand, the husband of
Mercedes the Catalane."
"Ah, sir!" cried the countess, "how terrible a vengeance for a
fault which fatality made me commit! -- for I am the only
culprit, Edmond, and if you owe revenge to any one, it is to
me, who had not fortitude to bear your absence and my
solitude."
"But," exclaimed Monte Cristo, "why was I absent? And why
were you alone?"
"Because you had been arrested, Edmond, and were a
prisoner."
"And why was I arrested? Why was I a prisoner?"

"I do not know," said Mercedes. "You do not, madame; at
least, I hope not. But I will tell you. I was arrested and
became a prisoner because, under the arbor of La Reserve,
the day before I was to marry you, a man named Danglars
wrote this letter, which the fisherman Fernand himself
posted." Monte Cristo went to a secretary, opened a drawer
by a spring, from which he took a paper which had lost its
"Mercedes is dead, madame," said Monte Cristo; "I know no
original color, and the ink of which had become of a rusty
one now of that name."
hue -- this he placed in the hands of Mercedes. It was
"Mercedes lives, sir, and she remembers, for she alone Danglars' letter to the king's attorney, which the Count of
recognized you when she saw you, and even before she saw Monte Cristo, disguised as a clerk from the house of
you, by your voice, Edmond, -- by the simple sound of your Thomson & French, had taken from the file against Edmond
voice; and from that moment she has followed your steps, Dantes, on the day he had paid the two hundred thousand
watched you, feared you, and she needs not to inquire what francs to M. de Boville. Mercedes read with terror the
hand has dealt the blow which now strikes M. de Morcerf."
following lines: -"Fernand, do you mean?" replied Monte Cristo, with bitter
irony; "since we are recalling names, let us remember them
all." Monte Cristo had pronounced the name of Fernand with
such an expression of hatred that Mercedes felt a thrill of
horror run through every vein. "You see, Edmond, I am not
mistaken, and have cause to say, `Spare my son!'"

"The king's attorney is informed by a friend to the throne
and religion that one Edmond Dantes, second in command
on board the Pharaon, this day arrived from Smyrna, after
having touched at Naples and Porto-Ferrajo, is the bearer of
a letter from Murat to the usurper, and of another letter from
the usurper to the Bonapartist club in Paris. Ample
"And who told you, madame, that I have any hostile corroboration of this statement may be obtained by arresting
the above-mentioned Edmond Dantes, who either carries the
intentions against your son?"
letter for Paris about with him, or has it at his father's abode.
"No one, in truth; but a mother has twofold sight. I guessed Should it not be found in possession of either father or son,
all; I followed him this evening to the opera, and, concealed then it will assuredly be discovered in the cabin belonging to
in a parquet box, have seen all."
the said Dantes on board the Pharaon."
"If you have seen all, madame, you know that the son of "How dreadful!" said Mercedes, passing her hand across her
Fernand has publicly insulted me," said Monte Cristo with brow, moist with perspiration; "and that letter" -awful calmness.
"I bought it for two hundred thousand francs, madame," said
"Oh, for pity's sake!"
Monte Cristo; "but that is a trifle, since it enables me to
365


CHAPTER 89


A NOCTURNAL INTERVIEW

justify myself to you."
"And the result of that letter" --

"Edmond," continued Mercedes, with her arms extended
towards the count, "since I first knew you, I have adored
"You well know, madame, was my arrest; but you do not
your name, have respected your memory. Edmond, my
know how long that arrest lasted. You do not know that I
friend, do not compel me to tarnish that noble and pure
remained for fourteen years within a quarter of a league of
image reflected incessantly on the mirror of my heart.
you, in a dungeon in the Chateau d'If. You do not know that
Edmond, if you knew all the prayers I have addressed to
every day of those fourteen years I renewed the vow of
God for you while I thought you were living and since I
vengeance which I had made the first day; and yet I was not
have thought you must be dead! Yes, dead, alas! I imagined
aware that you had married Fernand, my calumniator, and
your dead body buried at the foot of some gloomy tower, or
that my father had died of hunger!"
cast to the bottom of a pit by hateful jailers, and I wept! What
"Can it be?" cried Mercedes, shuddering.
could I do for you, Edmond, besides pray and weep? Listen;
"That is what I heard on leaving my prison fourteen years for ten years I dreamed each night the same dream. I had
after I had entered it; and that is why, on account of the been told that you had endeavored to escape; that you had
living Mercedes and my deceased father, I have sworn to taken the place of another prisoner; that you had slipped
into the winding sheet of a dead body; that you had been
revenge myself on Fernand, and -- I have revenged myself."
thrown alive from the top of the Chateau d'If, and that the
"And you are sure the unhappy Fernand did that?"
cry you uttered as you dashed upon the rocks first revealed
"I am satisfied, madame, that he did what I have told you; to your jailers that they were your murderers. Well, Edmond,
besides, that is not much more odious than that a Frenchman I swear to you, by the head of that son for whom I entreat
by adoption should pass over to the English; that a Spaniard your pity, -- Edmond, for ten years I saw every night every
by birth should have fought against the Spaniards; that a detail of that frightful tragedy, and for ten years I heard
stipendiary of Ali should have betrayed and murdered Ali. every night the cry which awoke me, shuddering and cold.
Compared with such things, what is the letter you have just And I, too, Edmond -- oh! believe me -- guilty as I was -- oh,
read? -- a lover's deception, which the woman who has yes, I, too, have suffered much!"
married that man ought certainly to forgive; but not so the "Have you known what it is to have your father starve to
lover who was to have married her. Well, the French did not death in your absence?" cried Monte Cristo, thrusting his
avenge themselves on the traitor, the Spaniards did not hands into his hair; "have you seen the woman you loved
shoot the traitor, Ali in his tomb left the traitor unpunished; giving her hand to your rival, while you were perishing at
but I, betrayed, sacrificed, buried, have risen from my tomb, the bottom of a dungeon?"
by the grace of God, to punish that man. He sends me for
that purpose, and here I am." The poor woman's head and
arms fell; her legs bent under her, and she fell on her knees. "No," interrupted Mercedes, "but I have seen him whom I
"Forgive, Edmond, forgive for my sake, who love you still!"
loved on the point of murdering my son." Mercedes uttered
The dignity of the wife checked the fervor of the lover and these words with such deep anguish, with an accent of such
the mother. Her forehead almost touched the carpet, when intense despair, that Monte Cristo could not restrain a sob.
the count sprang forward and raised her. Then seated on a The lion was daunted; the avenger was conquered. "What do
chair, she looked at the manly countenance of Monte Cristo, you ask of me?" said he, -- "your son's life? Well, he shall
on which grief and hatred still impressed a threatening live!" Mercedes uttered a cry which made the tears start from
expression. "Not crush that accursed race?" murmured he; Monte Cristo's eyes; but these tears disappeared almost
"abandon my purpose at the moment of its accomplishment? instantaneously, for, doubtless, God had sent some angel to
collect them -- far more precious were they in his eyes than
Impossible, madame, impossible!"
the richest pearls of Guzerat and Ophir.
"Edmond," said the poor mother, who tried every means,
"when I call you Edmond, why do you not call me "Oh," said she, seizing the count's hand and raising it to her
lips; "oh, thank you, thank you, Edmond! Now you are
Mercedes?"
exactly what I dreamt you were, -- the man I always loved.
"Mercedes!" repeated Monte Cristo; "Mercedes! Well yes, Oh, now I may say so!"
you are right; that name has still its charms, and this is the
first time for a long period that I have pronounced it so "So much the better," replied Monte Cristo; "as that poor
distinctly. Oh, Mercedes, I have uttered your name with the Edmond will not have long to be loved by you. Death is
sigh of melancholy, with the groan of sorrow, with the last about to return to the tomb, the phantom to retire in
effort of despair; I have uttered it when frozen with cold, darkness."
crouched on the straw in my dungeon; I have uttered it,
consumed with heat, rolling on the stone floor of my prison.
Mercedes, I must revenge myself, for I suffered fourteen
years, -- fourteen years I wept, I cursed; now I tell you,
Mercedes, I must revenge myself."

"What do you say, Edmond?"

The count, fearing to yield to the entreaties of her he had so
ardently loved, called his sufferings to the assistance of his
hatred. "Revenge yourself, then, Edmond," cried the poor
mother; "but let your vengeance fall on the culprits, -- on him,
on me, but not on my son!"

"You do not suppose that, publicly outraged in the face of a
whole theatre, in the presence of your friends and those of
your son -- challenged by a boy who will glory in my
forgiveness as if it were a victory -- you do not suppose that I
can for one moment wish to live. What I most loved after
you, Mercedes, was myself, my dignity, and that strength
which rendered me superior to other men; that strength was
my life. With one word you have crushed it, and I die."

"I say, since you command me, Mercedes, I must die."
"Die? and why so? Who talks of dying? Whence have you
these ideas of death?"

"It is written in the good book," said Monte Cristo, "that the
sins of the fathers shall fall upon their children to the third
and fourth generation. Since God himself dictated those
words to his prophet, why should I seek to make myself "But the duel will not take place, Edmond, since you
better than God?"
forgive?"
366

"It will take place," said Monte Cristo, in a most solemn tone;
"but instead of your son's blood to stain the ground, mine
will flow." Mercedes shrieked, and sprang towards Monte
Cristo, but, suddenly stopping, "Edmond," said she, "there is
a God above us, since you live and since I have seen you
again; I trust to him from my heart. While waiting his
assistance I trust to your word; you have said that my son
should live, have you not?"
"Yes, madame, he shall live," said Monte Cristo, surprised
that without more emotion Mercedes had accepted the
heroic sacrifice he made for her. Mercedes extended her
hand to the count.
"Edmond," said she, and her eyes were wet with tears while
looking at him to whom she spoke, "how noble it is of you,
how great the action you have just performed, how sublime
to have taken pity on a poor woman who appealed to you
with every chance against her, Alas, I am grown old with
grief more than with years, and cannot now remind my
Edmond by a smile, or by a look, of that Mercedes whom he
once spent so many hours in contemplating. Ah, believe me,
Edmond, as I told you, I too have suffered much; I repeat, it
is melancholy to pass one's life without having one joy to
recall, without preserving a single hope; but that proves that
all is not yet over. No, it is not finished; I feel it by what
remains in my heart. Oh, I repeat it, Edmond; what you have
just done is beautiful -- it is grand; it is sublime."
"Do you say so now, Mercedes? -- then what would you say
if you knew the extent of the sacrifice I make to you?
Suppose that the Supreme Being, after having created the

world and fertilized chaos, had paused in the work to spare
an angel the tears that might one day flow for mortal sins
from her immortal eyes; suppose that when everything was
in readiness and the moment had come for God to look upon
his work and see that it was good -- suppose he had snuffed
out the sun and tossed the world back into eternal night -then -- even then, Mercedes, you could not imagine what I
lose in sacrificing my life at this moment." Mercedes looked
at the count in a way which expressed at the same time her
astonishment, her admiration, and her gratitude. Monte
Cristo pressed his forehead on his burning hands, as if his
brain could no longer bear alone the weight of its thoughts.
"Edmond," said Mercedes, "I have but one word more to say
to you." The count smiled bitterly. "Edmond," continued she,
"you will see that if my face is pale, if my eyes are dull, if my
beauty is gone; if Mercedes, in short, no longer resembles her
former self in her features, you will see that her heart is still
the same. Adieu, then, Edmond; I have nothing more to ask
of heaven -- I have seen you again, and have found you as
noble and as great as formerly you were. Adieu, Edmond,
adieu, and thank you."
But the count did not answer. Mercedes opened the door of
the study and had disappeared before he had recovered
from the painful and profound revery into which his
thwarted vengeance had plunged him. The clock of the
Invalides struck one when the carriage which conveyed
Madame de Morcerf away rolled on the pavement of the
Champs-Elysees, and made Monte Cristo raise his head.
"What a fool I was," said he, "not to tear my heart out on the
day when I resolved to avenge myself!"

367


CHAPTER 90


Chapter 90

A

fter Mercedes had left Monte Cristo, he fell into
profound gloom. Around him and within him the flight
of thought seemed to have stopped; his energetic mind
slumbered, as the body does after extreme fatigue. "What?"
said he to himself, while the lamp and the wax lights were
nearly burnt out, and the servants were waiting impatiently
in the anteroom; "what? this edifice which I have been so
long preparing, which I have reared with so much care and
toil, is to be crushed by a single touch, a word, a breath! Yes,
this self, of whom I thought so much, of whom I was so
proud, who had appeared so worthless in the dungeons of
the Chateau d'If, and whom I had succeeded in making so
great, will be but a lump of clay to-morrow. Alas, it is not the
death of the body I regret; for is not the destruction of the
vital principle, the repose to which everything is tending, to
which every unhappy being aspires, -- is not this the repose
of matter after which I so long sighed, and which I was
seeking to attain by the painful process of starvation when
Faria appeared in my dungeon? What is death for me? One
step farther into rest, -- two, perhaps, into silence.
"No, it is not existence, then, that I regret, but the ruin of
projects so slowly carried out, so laboriously framed.
Providence is now opposed to them, when I most thought it
would be propitious. It is not God's will that they should be
accomplished. This burden, almost as heavy as a world,
which I had raised, and I had thought to bear to the end, was
too great for my strength, and I was compelled to lay it
down in the middle of my career. Oh, shall I then, again
become a fatalist, whom fourteen years of despair and ten of
hope had rendered a believer in providence? And all this -all this, because my heart, which I thought dead, was only
sleeping; because it has awakened and has begun to beat
again, because I have yielded to the pain of the emotion
excited in my breast by a woman's voice. Yet," continued the
count, becoming each moment more absorbed in the
anticipation of the dreadful sacrifice for the morrow, which
Mercedes had accepted, "yet, it is impossible that so
noble-minded a woman should thus through selfishness
consent to my death when I am in the prime of life and
strength; it is impossible that she can carry to such a point
maternal love, or rather delirium. There are virtues which
become crimes by exaggeration. No, she must have
conceived some pathetic scene; she will come and throw
herself between us; and what would be sublime here will
there appear ridiculous." The blush of pride mounted to the
count's forehead as this thought passed through his mind.
"Ridiculous?" repeated he; "and the ridicule will fall on me. I
ridiculous? No, I would rather die."

THE MEETING

The Meeting
was no other than his will, made since his arrival in Paris) a
sort of codicil, clearly explaining the nature of his death. "I
do this, O my God," said he, with his eyes raised to heaven,
"as much for thy honor as for mine. I have during ten years
considered myself the agent of thy vengeance, and other
wretches, like Morcerf, Danglars, Villefort, even Morcerf
himself, must not imagine that chance has freed them from
their enemy. Let them know, on the contrary, that their
punishment, which had been decreed by providence, is only
delayed by my present determination, and although they
escape it in this world, it awaits them in another, and that
they are only exchanging time for eternity."
While he was thus agitated by gloomy uncertainties, -wretched waking dreams of grief, -- the first rays of morning
pierced his windows, and shone upon the pale blue paper on
which he had just inscribed his justification of providence. It
was just five o'clock in the morning when a slight noise like a
stifled sigh reached his ear. He turned his head, looked
around him, and saw no one; but the sound was repeated
distinctly enough to convince him of its reality.
He arose, and quietly opening the door of the drawing-room,
saw Haidee, who had fallen on a chair, with her arms
hanging down and her beautiful head thrown back. She had
been standing at the door, to prevent his going out without
seeing her, until sleep, which the young cannot resist, had
overpowered her frame, wearied as she was with watching.
The noise of the door did not awaken her, and Monte Cristo
gazed at her with affectionate regret. "She remembered that
she had a son," said he; "and I forgot I had a daughter." Then,
shaking his head sorrowfully, "Poor Haidee," said he; "she
wished to see me, to speak to me; she has feared or guessed
something. Oh, I cannot go without taking leave of her; I
cannot die without confiding her to some one." He quietly
regained his seat, and wrote under the other lines: --

"I bequeath to Maximilian Morrel, captain of Spahis, -- and
son of my former patron, Pierre Morrel, shipowner at
Marseilles, -- the sum of twenty millions, a part of which
may be offered to his sister Julia and brother-in-law
Emmanuel, if he does not fear this increase of fortune may
mar their happiness. These twenty millions are concealed in
my grotto at Monte Cristo, of which Bertuccio knows the
secret. If his heart is free, and he will marry Haidee, the
daughter of Ali Pasha of Yanina, whom I have brought up
with the love of a father, and who has shown the love and
tenderness of a daughter for me, he will thus accomplish my
last wish. This will has already constituted Haidee heiress of
the rest of my fortune, consisting of lands, funds in England,
Austria, and Holland, furniture in my different palaces and
By thus exaggerating to his own mind the anticipated
houses, and which without the twenty millions and the
ill-fortune of the next day, to which he had condemned
legacies to my servants, may still amount to sixty millions."
himself by promising Mercedes to spare her son, the count at
last exclaimed, "Folly, folly, folly! -- to carry generosity so far He was finishing the last line when a cry behind him made
as to put myself up as a mark for that young man to aim at. him start, and the pen fell from his hand. "Haidee," said he.
He will never believe that my death was suicide; and yet it is "did you read it?"
important for the honor of my memory, -- and this surely is "Oh, my lord," said she, "why are you writing thus at such an
not vanity, but a justifiable pride, -- it is important the world hour? Why are you bequeathing all your fortune to me? Are
should know that I have consented, by my free will, to stop you going to leave me?"
my arm, already raised to strike, and that with the arm
which has been so powerful against others I have struck "I am going on a journey, dear child," said Monte Cristo,
with an expression of infinite tenderness and melancholy;
myself. It must be; it shall be."
"and if any misfortune should happen to me"
Seizing a pen, he drew a paper from a secret drawer in his
desk, and wrote at the bottom of the document (which The count stopped. "Well?" asked the young girl, with an
368

authoritative tone the count had never observed before, and
which startled him. "Well, if any misfortune happen to me,"
replied Monte Cristo, "I wish my daughter to be happy."
Haidee smiled sorrowfully, and shook her head. "Do you
think of dying, my lord?" said she.

"No; the offence was public, and every one is already talking
of it."
"Well?"
"Well, I hoped to get an exchange of arms, -- to substitute the
sword for the pistol; the pistol is blind."

"The wise man, my child, has said, `It is good to think of
"Have you succeeded?" asked Monte Cristo quickly, with an
death.'"
imperceptible gleam of hope.
"Well, if you die," said she, "bequeath your fortune to others,
for if you die I shall require nothing;" and, taking the paper, "No; for your skill with the sword is so well known."
she tore it in four pieces, and threw it into the middle of the "Ah? -- who has betrayed me?"
room. Then, the effort having exhausted her strength, she fell
not asleep this time, but fainting on the floor. The count "The skilful swordsman whom you have conquered."
leaned over her and raised her in his arms; and seeing that "And you failed?"
sweet pale face, those lovely eyes closed, that beautiful form
"They positively refused."
motionless and to all appearance lifeless, the idea occurred
to him for the first time, that perhaps she loved him "Morrel," said the count, "have you ever seen me fire a
pistol?"
otherwise than as a daughter loves a father.
"Alas," murmured he, with intense suffering, "I might, then,
have been happy yet." Then he carried Haidee to her room,
resigned her to the care of her attendants, and returning to
his study, which he shut quickly this time, he again copied
the destroyed will. As he was finishing, the sound of a
cabriolet entering the yard was heard. Monte Cristo
approached the window, and saw Maximilian and
Emmanuel alight. "Good," said he; "it was time," -- and he
sealed his will with three seals. A moment afterwards he
heard a noise in the drawing-room, and went to open the
door himself. Morrel was there; he had come twenty minutes
before the time appointed. "I am perhaps come too soon,
count," said he, "but I frankly acknowledge that I have not
closed my eyes all night, nor has any one in my house. I need
to see you strong in your courageous assurance, to recover
myself." Monte Cristo could not resist this proof of affection;
he not only extended his hand to the young man, but flew to
him with open arms. "Morrel," said he, "it is a happy day for
me, to feel that I am beloved by such a man as you.
Good-morning, Emmanuel; you will come with me then,
Maximilian?"

"Never."
"Well, we have time; look." Monte Cristo took the pistols he
held in his hand when Mercedes entered, and fixing an ace
of clubs against the iron plate, with four shots he
successively shot off the four sides of the club. At each shot
Morrel turned pale. He examined the bullets with which
Monte Cristo performed this dexterous feat, and saw that
they were no larger than buckshot. "It is astonishing," said he.
"Look, Emmanuel." Then turning towards Monte Cristo,
"Count," said he, "in the name of all that is dear to you, I
entreat you not to kill Albert! -- the unhappy youth has a
mother."
"You are right," said Monte Cristo; "and I have none." These
words were uttered in a tone which made Morrel shudder.
"You are the offended party, count."
"Doubtless; what does that imply?"
"That you will fire first."
"I fire first?"

"Did you doubt it?" said the young captain.

"Oh, I obtained, or rather claimed that; we had conceded
enough for them to yield us that."

"But if I were wrong" --

"And at what distance?"

"I watched you during the whole scene of that challenge
yesterday; I have been thinking of your firmness all night,
and I said to myself that justice must be on your side, or
man's countenance is no longer to be relied on."

"Twenty paces." A smile of terrible import passed over the
count's lips. "Morrel," said he, "do not forget what you have
just seen."

"But, Morrel, Albert is your friend?"

"The only chance for Albert's safety, then, will arise from
your emotion."

"Simply an acquaintance, sir."

"I suffer from emotion?" said Monte Cristo.

"You met on the same day you first saw me?"

"Or from your generosity, my friend; to so good a marksman
as you are, I may say what would appear absurd to another."

"Yes, that is true; but I should not have recollected it if you
had not reminded me."

"What is that?"

"Thank you, Morrel." Then ringing the bell once, "Look." said "Break his arm -- wound him -- but do not kill him."
he to Ali, who came immediately, "take that to my solicitor.
"I will tell you, Morrel," said the count, "that I do not need
It is my will, Morrel. When I am dead, you will go and
entreating to spare the life of M. de Morcerf; he shall be so
examine it."
well spared, that he will return quietly with his two friends,
while I" -"What?" said Morrel, "you dead?"
"Yes; must I not be prepared for everything, dear friend? But
what did you do yesterday after you left me?"
"I went to Tortoni's, where, as I expected, I found
Beauchamp and Chateau-Renaud. I own I was seeking
them."

"And you?"
"That will be another thing; I shall be brought home."
"No, no," cried Maximilian, quite unable to restrain his
feelings.

"Listen, count; the affair is serious and unavoidable."

"As I told you, my dear Morrel, M. de Morcerf will kill me."
Morrel looked at him in utter amazement. "But what has
happened, then, since last evening, count?"

"Did you doubt it!"

"The same thing that happened to Brutus the night before

"Why, when all was arranged?"

369


CHAPTER 90

the battle of Philippi; I have seen a ghost."
"And that ghost" -"Told me, Morrel, that I had lived long enough." Maximilian
and Emmanuel looked at each other. Monte Cristo drew out
his watch. "Let us go," said he; "it is five minutes past seven,
and the appointment was for eight o'clock." A carriage was
in readiness at the door. Monte Cristo stepped into it with
his two friends. He had stopped a moment in the passage to
listen at a door, and Maximilian and Emmanuel, who had
considerately passed forward a few steps, thought they
heard him answer by a sigh to a sob from within. As the
clock struck eight they drove up to the place of meeting. "We
are first," said Morrel, looking out of the window. "Excuse
me, sir," said Baptistin, who had followed his master with
indescribable terror, "but I think I see a carriage down there
under the trees."

THE MEETING
the open space where they were assembled. "You are
doubtless provided with pistols, gentlemen? M. de Monte
Cristo yields his right of using his."
"We had anticipated this kindness on the part of the count,"
said Beauchamp, "and I have brought some weapons which I
bought eight or ten days since, thinking to want them on a
similar occasion. They are quite new, and have not yet been
used. Will you examine them."
"Oh, M. Beauchamp, if you assure me that M. de Morcerf
does not know these pistols, you may readily believe that
your word will be quite sufficient."

"Gentlemen," said Chateau-Renaud, "it is not Morcerf
coming in that carriage; -- faith, it is Franz and Debray!" The
two young men he announced were indeed approaching.
"What chance brings you here, gentlemen?" said
Chateau-Renaud, shaking hands with each of them.
Monte Cristo sprang lightly from the carriage, and offered "Because," said Debray, "Albert sent this morning to request
his hand to assist Emmanuel and Maximilian. The latter us to come." Beauchamp and Chateau-Renaud exchanged
retained the count's hand between his. "I like," said he, "to looks of astonishment. "I think I understand his reason," said
feel a hand like this, when its owner relies on the goodness Morrel.
of his cause."
"What is it?"
"It seems to me," said Emmanuel, "that I see two young men
"Yesterday afternoon I received a letter from M. de Morcerf,
down there, who are evidently, waiting." Monte Cristo drew
begging me to attend the opera."
Morrel a step or two behind his brother-in-law.
"Maximilian," said he, "are your affections disengaged?" "And I," said Debray.
Morrel looked at Monte Cristo with astonishment. "I do not "And I also," said Franz.
seek your confidence, my dear friend. I only ask you a
"And we, too," added Beauchamp and Chateau-Renaud.
simple question; answer it; -- that is all I require."
"Having wished you all to witness the challenge, he now
"I love a young girl, count."
wishes you to be present at the combat."
"Do you love her much?"
"Exactly so," said the young men; "you have probably
"More than my life."
guessed right."
"Another hope defeated!" said the count. Then, with a sigh, "But, after all these arrangements, he does not come himself,"
"Poor Haidee!" murmured he.
said Chateau-Renaud. "Albert is ten minutes after time."
"To tell the truth, count, if I knew less of you, I should think
that you were less brave than you are."

"There he comes," said Beauchamp, "on horseback, at full
gallop, followed by a servant."

"Because I sigh when thinking of some one I am leaving?
Come, Morrel, it is not like a soldier to be so bad a judge of
courage. Do I regret life? What is it to me, who have passed
twenty years between life and death? Moreover, do not
alarm yourself, Morrel; this weakness, if it is such, is
betrayed to you alone. I know the world is a drawing-room,
from which we must retire politely and honestly; that is,
with a bow, and our debts of honor paid."

"How imprudent," said Chateau-Renaud, "to come on
horseback to fight a duel with pistols, after all the
instructions I had given him."

"And besides," said Beauchamp, "with a collar above his
cravat, an open coat and white waistcoat! Why has he not
painted a spot upon his heart? -- it would have been more
simple." Meanwhile Albert had arrived within ten paces of
the group formed by the five young men. He jumped from
"That is to the purpose. Have you brought your arms?"
his horse, threw the bridle on his servant's arms, and joined
them. He was pale, and his eyes were red and swollen; it
"I? -- what for? I hope these gentlemen have theirs."
was evident that he had not slept. A shade of melancholy
"I will inquire," said Morrel.
gravity overspread his countenance, which was not natural
"Do; but make no treaty -- you understand me?"
to him. "I thank you, gentlemen," said he, "for having
complied with my request; I feel extremely grateful for this
"You need not fear." Morrel advanced towards Beauchamp
mark of friendship." Morrel had stepped back as Morcerf
and Chateau-Renaud, who, seeing his intention, came to
approached, and remained at a short distance. "And to you
meet him. The three young men bowed to each other
also, M. Morrel, my thanks are due. Come, there cannot be
courteously, if not affably.
too many."
"Excuse me, gentlemen," said Morrel, "but I do not see M. de
"Sir," said Maximilian, "you are not perhaps aware that I am
Morcerf."
M. de Monte Cristo's friend?"
"He sent us word this morning," replied Chateau-Renaud,
"I was not sure, but I thought it might be so. So much the
"that he would meet us on the ground."
better; the more honorable men there are here the better I
"Ah," said Morrel. Beauchamp pulled out his watch. "It is shall be satisfied."
only five minutes past eight," said he to Morrel; "there is not
"M. Morrel," said Chateau-Renaud, "will you apprise the
much time lost yet."
Count of Monte Cristo that M. de Morcerf is arrived, and we
"Oh, I made no allusion of that kind," replied Morrel.
are at his disposal?" Morrel was preparing to fulfil his
"There is a carriage coming," said Chateau-Renaud. It commission. Beauchamp had meanwhile drawn the box of
advanced rapidly along one of the avenues leading towards pistols from the carriage. "Stop, gentlemen," said Albert; "I
370

have two words to say to the Count of Monte Cristo."

recognized the influence of Mercedes, and saw why her
noble heart had not opposed the sacrifice she knew
"In private?" asked Morrel.
beforehand would be useless. "Now, sir," said Albert, "if you
"No, sir; before all who are here."
think my apology sufficient, pray give me your hand. Next
Albert's witnesses looked at each other. Franz and Debray to the merit of infallibility which you appear to possess, I
exchanged some words in a whisper, and Morrel, rejoiced at rank that of candidly acknowledging a fault. But this
this unexpected incident, went to fetch the count, who was confession concerns me only. I acted well as a man, but you
walking in a retired path with Emmanuel. "What does he have acted better than man. An angel alone could have
saved one of us from death -- that angel came from heaven,
want with me?" said Monte Cristo.
if not to make us friends (which, alas, fatality renders
"I do not know, but he wishes to speak to you."
impossible), at least to make us esteem each other."
"Ah?" said Monte Cristo, "I trust he is not going to tempt me
by some fresh insult!"
Monte Cristo, with moistened eye, heaving breast, and lips
"I do not think that such is his intention," said Morrel.
half open, extended to Albert a hand which the latter
The count advanced, accompanied by Maximilian and pressed with a sentiment resembling respectful fear.
Emmanuel. His calm and serene look formed a singular "Gentlemen," said he, "M. de Monte Cristo receives my
contrast to Albert's grief-stricken face, who approached also, apology. I had acted hastily towards him. Hasty actions are
followed by the other four young men. When at three paces generally bad ones. Now my fault is repaired. I hope the
world will not call me cowardly for acting as my conscience
distant from each other, Albert and the count stopped.
dictated. But if any one should entertain a false opinion of
"Approach, gentlemen," said Albert; "I wish you not to lose
me," added he, drawing himself up as if he would challenge
one word of what I am about to have the honor of saying to
both friends and enemies, "I shall endeavor to correct his
the Count of Monte Cristo, for it must be repeated by you to
mistake."
all who will listen to it, strange as it may appear to you."
"What happened during the night?" asked Beauchamp of
"Proceed, sir," said the count.
Chateau-Renaud; "we appear to make a very sorry figure
"Sir," said Albert, at first with a tremulous voice, but which here."
gradually because firmer, "I reproached you with exposing
"In truth, what Albert has just done is either very despicable
the conduct of M. de Morcerf in Epirus, for guilty as I knew
or very noble," replied the baron.
he was, I thought you had no right to punish him; but I have
since learned that you had that right. It is not Fernand "What can it mean?" said Debray to Franz. "The Count of
Mondego's treachery towards Ali Pasha which induces me Monte Cristo acts dishonorably to M. de Morcerf, and is
so readily to excuse you, but the treachery of the fisherman justified by his son! Had I ten Yaninas in my family, I should
Fernand towards you, and the almost unheard-of miseries only consider myself the more bound to fight ten times." As
which were its consequences; and I say, and proclaim it for Monte Cristo, his head was bent down, his arms were
publicly, that you were justified in revenging yourself on my powerless. Bowing under the weight of twenty-four years'
father, and I, his son, thank you for not using greater reminiscences, he thought not of Albert, of Beauchamp, of
Chateau-Renaud, or of any of that group; but he thought of
severity."
that courageous woman who had come to plead for her son's
Had a thunderbolt fallen in the midst of the spectators of this
life, to whom he had offered his, and who had now saved it
unexpected scene, it would not have surprised them more
by the revelation of a dreadful family secret, capable of
than did Albert's declaration. As for Monte Cristo, his eyes
destroying forever in that young man's heart every feeling of
slowly rose towards heaven with an expression of infinite
filial piety.
gratitude. He could not understand how Albert's fiery
nature, of which he had seen so much among the Roman "Providence still," murmured he; "now only am I fully
bandits, had suddenly stooped to this humiliation. He convinced of being the emissary of God!"

371


CHAPTER 91


Chapter 91

MOTHER AND SON

Mother And Son

T

he Count of Monte Cristo bowed to the five young men
with a melancholy and dignified smile, and got into his
carriage with Maximilian and Emmanuel. Albert,
Beauchamp, and Chateau-Renaud remained alone. Albert
looked at his two friends, not timidly, but in a way that
appeared to ask their opinion of what he had just done.

which his servant had tied it, he mounted and galloped off
in the direction of Paris.

"Good-by, Albert," said Beauchamp suddenly, carelessly
extending his hand to the young man. The latter did not
appear to arouse from his lethargy; in fact, he did not notice
the offered hand. "Good-by," said Chateau-Renaud in his
turn, keeping his little cane in his left hand, and saluting
with his right. Albert's lips scarcely whispered "Good-by,"
but his look was more explicit; it expressed a whole poem of
restrained anger, proud disdain, and generous indignation.
He preserved his melancholy and motionless position for
some time after his two friends had regained their carriage;
then suddenly unfastening his horse from the little tree to
372

the same idea had animated these two beings, Mercedes was
doing the same in her apartments that he had just done in
his. Everything was in order, -- laces, dresses, jewels, linen,
money, all were arranged in the drawers, and the countess
was carefully collecting the keys. Albert saw all these
preparations and understood them, and exclaiming, "My
mother!" he threw his arms around her neck.

In a quarter of an hour he was entering the house in the Rue
du Helder. As he alighted, he thought he saw his father's
pale face behind the curtain of the count's bedroom. Albert
turned away his head with a sigh, and went to his own
"Indeed, my dear friend," said Beauchamp first, who had apartments. He cast one lingering look on all the luxuries
either the most feeling or the least dissimulation, "allow me which had rendered life so easy and so happy since his
to congratulate you; this is a very unhoped-for conclusion of infancy; he looked at the pictures, whose faces seemed to
a very disagreeable affair."
smile, and the landscapes, which appeared painted in
brighter colors. Then he took away his mother's portrait,
Albert remained silent and wrapped in thought.
with its oaken frame, leaving the gilt frame from which he
Chateau-Renaud contented himself with tapping his boot
took it black and empty. Then he arranged all his beautiful
with his flexible cane. "Are we not going?" said he, after this
Turkish arms, his fine English guns, his Japanese china, his
embarrassing silence. "When you please," replied
cups mounted in silver, his artistic bronzes by Feucheres and
Beauchamp; "allow me only to compliment M. de Morcerf,
Barye; examined the cupboards, and placed the key in each;
who has given proof to-day of rare chivalric generosity."
threw into a drawer of his secretary, which he left open, all
"Oh, yes," said Chateau-Renaud.
the pocket-money he had about him, and with it the
"It is magnificent," continued Beauchamp, "to be able to thousand fancy jewels from his vases and his jewel-boxes;
then he made an exact inventory of everything, and placed it
exercise so much self-control!"
in the most conspicuous part of the table, after putting aside
"Assuredly; as for me, I should have been incapable of it," the books and papers which had collected there.
said Chateau-Renaud, with most significant coolness.
At the beginning of this work, his servant, notwithstanding
"Gentlemen," interrupted Albert, "I think you did not orders to the contrary, came to his room. "What do you
understand that something very serious had passed between want?" asked he, with a more sorrowful than angry tone.
M. de Monte Cristo and myself."
"Pardon me, sir," replied the valet; "you had forbidden me to
"Possibly, possibly," said Beauchamp immediately; "but disturb you, but the Count of Morcerf has called me."
every simpleton would not be able to understand your "Well!" said Albert.
heroism, and sooner or later you will find yourself
compelled to explain it to them more energetically than "I did not like to go to him without first seeing you."
would be convenient to your bodily health and the duration "Why?"
of your life. May I give you a friendly counsel? Set out for
"Because the count is doubtless aware that I accompanied
Naples, the Hague, or St. Petersburg -- calm countries, where
you to the meeting this morning."
the point of honor is better understood than among our
hot-headed Parisians. Seek quietude and oblivion, so that "It is probable," said Albert.
you may return peaceably to France after a few years. Am I
"And since he has sent for me, it is doubtless to question me
not right, M. de Chateau-Renaud?"
on what happened there. What must I answer?"
"That is quite my opinion," said the gentleman; "nothing
"The truth."
induces serious duels so much as a duel forsworn."
"Then I shall say the duel did not take place?"
"Thank you, gentlemen," replied Albert, with a smile of
indifference; "I shall follow your advice -- not because you "You will say I apologized to the Count of Monte Cristo. Go."
give it, but because I had before intended to quit France. I The valet bowed and retired, and Albert returned to his
thank you equally for the service you have rendered me in inventory. As he was finishing this work, the sound of
being my seconds. It is deeply engraved on my heart, and, horses prancing in the yard, and the wheels of a carriage
after what you have just said, I remember that only." shaking his window, attracted his attention. He approached
Chateau-Renaud and Beauchamp looked at each other; the the window, and saw his father get into it, and drive away.
impression was the same on both of them, and the tone in The door was scarcely closed when Albert bent his steps to
which Morcerf had just expressed his thanks was so his mother's room; and, no one being there to announce him,
determined that the position would have become he advanced to her bed-chamber, and distressed by what he
embarrassing for all if the conversation had continued.
saw and guessed, stopped for one moment at the door. As if

The artist who could have depicted the expression of these
two countenances would certainly have made of them a
beautiful picture. All these proofs of an energetic resolution,

which Albert did not fear on his own account, alarmed him would find a humble but decent lodging, and thither he
for his mother. "What are you doing?" asked he.
intended conducting the countess. As the carriage stopped at
the door, and Albert was alighting, a man approached and
"What were you doing?" replied she.
gave him a letter. Albert recognized the bearer. "From the
"Oh, my mother!" exclaimed Albert, so overcome he could count," said Bertuccio. Albert took the letter, opened, and
scarcely speak; "it is not the same with you and me -- you read it, then looked round for Bertuccio, but he was gone. He
cannot have made the same resolution I have, for I have returned to Mercedes with tears in his eyes and heaving
come to warn you that I bid adieu to your house, and -- and breast, and without uttering a word he gave her the letter.
to you."
Mercedes read: -"I also," replied Mercedes, "am going, and I acknowledge I
had depended on your accompanying me; have I deceived
myself?"

Albert, -- While showing you that I have discovered your
plans, I hope also to convince you of my delicacy. You are
free, you leave the count's house, and you take your mother
"Mother," said Albert with firmness. "I cannot make you to your home; but reflect, Albert, you owe her more than
share the fate I have planned for myself. I must live your poor noble heart can pay her. Keep the struggle for
henceforth without rank and fortune, and to begin this hard yourself, bear all the suffering, but spare her the trial of
apprenticeship I must borrow from a friend the loaf I shall poverty which must accompany your first efforts; for she
eat until I have earned one. So, my dear mother, I am going deserves not even the shadow of the misfortune which has
at once to ask Franz to lend me the small sum I shall require this day fallen on her, and providence is not willing that the
innocent should suffer for the guilty. I know you are going
to supply my present wants."
to leave the Rue du Helder without taking anything with
"You, my poor child, suffer poverty and hunger? Oh, do not you. Do not seek to know how I discovered it; I know it -say so; it will break my resolutions."
that is sufficient.
"But not mine, mother," replied Albert. "I am young and Now, listen, Albert. Twenty-four years ago I returned, proud
strong; I believe I am courageous, and since yesterday I have and joyful, to my country. I had a betrothed, Albert, a lovely
learned the power of will. Alas, my dear mother, some have girl whom I adored, and I was bringing to my betrothed a
suffered so much, and yet live, and have raised a new hundred and fifty louis, painfully amassed by ceaseless toil.
fortune on the ruin of all the promises of happiness which This money was for her; I destined it for her, and, knowing
heaven had made them -- on the fragments of all the hope the treachery of the sea I buried our treasure in the little
which God had given them! I have seen that, mother; I know garden of the house my father lived in at Marseilles, on the
that from the gulf in which their enemies have plunged them Allees de Meillan. Your mother, Albert, knows that poor
they have risen with so much vigor and glory that in their house well. A short time since I passed through Marseilles,
turn they have ruled their former conquerors, and have and went to see the old place, which revived so many
punished them. No. mother; from this moment I have done painful recollections; and in the evening I took a spade and
with the past, and accept nothing from it -- not even a name, dug in the corner of the garden where I had concealed my
because you can understand that your son cannot bear the treasure. The iron box was there -- no one had touched it -name of a man who ought to blush for it before another."
under a beautiful fig-tree my father had planted the day I
"Albert, my child," said Mercedes, "if I had a stronger heart
that is the counsel I would have given you; your conscience
has spoken when my voice became too weak; listen to its
dictates. You had friends, Albert; break off their
acquaintance. But do not despair; you have life before you,
my dear Albert, for you are yet scarcely twenty-two years
old; and as a pure heart like yours wants a spotless name,
take my father's -- it was Herrera. I am sure, my dear Albert,
whatever may be your career, you will soon render that
name illustrious. Then, my son, return to the world still
more brilliant because of your former sorrows; and if I am
wrong, still let me cherish these hopes, for I have no future
to look forward to. For me the grave opens when I pass the
threshold of this house."

was born, which overshadowed the spot. Well, Albert, this
money, which was formerly designed to promote the
comfort and tranquillity of the woman I adored, may now,
through strange and painful circumstances, be devoted to
the same purpose. Oh, feel for me, who could offer millions
to that poor woman, but who return her only the piece of
black bread forgotten under my poor roof since the day I
was torn from her I loved. You are a generous man, Albert,
but perhaps you may be blinded by pride or resentment; if
you refuse me, if you ask another for what I have a right to
offer you, I will say it is ungenerous of you to refuse the life
of your mother at the hands of a man whose father was
allowed by your father to die in all the horrors of poverty
and despair.

"I will fulfil all your wishes, my dear mother," said the
young man. "Yes, I share your hopes; the anger of heaven
will not pursue us, since you are pure and I am innocent. But,
since our resolution is formed, let us act promptly. M. de
Morcerf went out about half an hour ago; the opportunity in
favorable to avoid an explanation."

Albert stood pale and motionless to hear what his mother
would decide after she had finished reading this letter.
Mercedes turned her eyes with an ineffable look towards
heaven. "I accept it," said she; "he has a right to pay the
dowry, which I shall take with me to some convent!" Putting
the letter in her bosom, she took her son's arm, and with a
firmer step than she even herself expected she went
down-stairs.

"I am ready, my son," said Mercedes. Albert ran to fetch a
carriage. He recollected that there was a small furnished
house to let in the Rue de Saints Peres, where his mother

373


CHAPTER 92


Chapter 92

M

THE SUICIDE

The Suicide

eanwhile Monte Cristo had also returned to town with
Emmanuel and Maximilian. Their return was cheerful.
Emmanuel did not conceal his joy at the peaceful
termination of the affair, and was loud in his expressions of
delight. Morrel, in a corner of the carriage, allowed his
brother-in-law's gayety to expend itself in words, while he
felt equal inward joy, which, however, betrayed itself only in
his countenance. At the Barriere du Trone they met Bertuccio,
who was waiting there, motionless as a sentinel at his post.
Monte Cristo put his head out of the window, exchanged a
few words with him in a low tone, and the steward
disappeared. "Count," said Emmanuel, when they were at
the end of the Place Royale, "put me down at my door, that
my wife may not have a single moment of needless anxiety
on my account or yours."

"You will breakfast with me, will you not, Morrel?" said the
count, to turn the conversation.

carriage proceeded. "See what good fortune I brought you!"
said Morrel, when he was alone with the count. "Have you
not thought so?"

"I will remember it," said the young man, "as selfish children
recollect their parents when they want their aid. When I
need your assistance, and the moment arrives, I will come to
you, count."

"No; I must leave you at ten o'clock."
"Your engagement was for breakfast, then?" said the count.
Morrel smiled, and shook his head. "Still you must breakfast
somewhere."
"But if I am not hungry?" said the young man.
"Oh," said the count, "I only know two things which destroy
the appetite, -- grief -- and as I am happy to see you very
cheerful, it is not that -- and love. Now after what you told
me this morning of your heart, I may believe" -"Well, count," replied Morrel gayly, "I will not dispute it."

"But you will not make me your confidant, Maximilian?"
"If it were not ridiculous to make a display of our triumph, I
said the count, in a tone which showed how gladly he would
would invite the count to our house; besides that, he
have been admitted to the secret.
doubtless has some trembling heart to comfort. So we will
"I showed you this morning that I had a heart, did I not,
take leave of our friend, and let him hasten home."
count?" Monte Cristo only answered by extending his hand
"Stop a moment," said Monte Cristo; "do not let me lose both
to the young man. "Well," continued the latter, "since that
my companions. Return, Emmanuel, to your charming wife,
heart is no longer with you in the Bois de Vincennes, it is
and present my best compliments to her; and do you, Morrel,
elsewhere, and I must go and find it."
accompany me to the Champs Elysees."
"Go," said the count deliberately; "go, dear friend, but
"Willingly," said Maximilian; "particularly as I have business
promise me if you meet with any obstacle to remember that I
in that quarter."
have some power in this world, that I am happy to use that
"Shall we wait breakfast for you?" asked Emmanuel.
power in the behalf of those I love, and that I love you,
"No," replied the young man. The door was closed, and the Morrel."

"Yes," said Monte Cristo; "for that reason I wished to keep
you near me."

"Well, I rely upon your promise. Good-by, then."

"It is miraculous!" continued Morrel, answering his own "Good-by, till we meet again." They had arrived in the
thoughts.
Champs Elysees. Monte Cristo opened the carriage-door,
Morrel sprang out on the pavement, Bertuccio was waiting
"What?" said Monte Cristo.
on the steps. Morrel disappeared down the Avenue de
"What has just happened."
Marigny, and Monte Cristo hastened to join Bertuccio.
"Yes," said the Count, "you are right -- it is miraculous."
"Well?" asked he.
"For Albert is brave," resumed Morrel.

"She is going to leave her house," said the steward.

"Very brave," said Monte Cristo; "I have seen him sleep with
a sword suspended over his head."

"And her son?"

"And I know he has fought two duels," said Morrel. "How
can you reconcile that with his conduct this morning?"
"All owing to your influence," replied Monte Cristo, smiling.
"It is well for Albert he is not in the army," said Morrel.
"Why?"
"An apology on the ground!" said the young captain,
shaking his head.
"Come," said the count mildly, "do not entertain the
prejudices of ordinary men, Morrel! Acknowledge, that if
Albert is brave, he cannot be a coward; he must then have
had some reason for acting as he did this morning, and
confess that his conduct is more heroic than otherwise."
"Doubtless, doubtless," said Morrel; "but I shall say, like the
Spaniard, `He has not been so brave to-day as he was
yesterday.'"
374

"Florentin, his valet, thinks he is going to do the same."
"Come this way." Monte Cristo took Bertuccio into his study,
wrote the letter we have seen, and gave it to the steward.
"Go," said he quickly. "But first, let Haidee be informed that I
have returned."
"Here I am," said the young girl, who at the sound of the
carriage had run down-stairs and whose face was radiant
with joy at seeing the count return safely. Bertuccio left.
Every transport of a daughter finding a father, all the delight
of a mistress seeing an adored lover, were felt by Haidee
during the first moments of this meeting, which she had so
eagerly expected. Doubtless, although less evident, Monte
Cristo's joy was not less intense. Joy to hearts which have
suffered long is like the dew on the ground after a long
drought; both the heart and the ground absorb that
benificent moisture falling on them, and nothing is
outwardly apparent.

Monte Cristo was beginning to think, what he had not for a
long time dared to believe, that there were two Mercedes in
the world, and he might yet be happy. His eye, elate with
happiness, was reading eagerly the tearful gaze of Haidee,
when suddenly the door opened. The count knit his brow.
"M. de Morcerf!" said Baptistin, as if that name sufficed for
his excuse. In fact, the count's face brightened.
"Which," asked he, "the viscount or the count?"
"The count."
"Oh," exclaimed Haidee, "is it not yet over?"
"I know not if it is finished, my beloved child," said Monte
Cristo, taking the young girl's hands; "but I do know you
have nothing more to fear."
"But it is the wretched" -"That man cannot injure me, Haidee," said Monte Cristo; "it
was his son alone that there was cause to fear."
"And what I have suffered," said the young girl, "you shall
never know, my lord." Monte Cristo smiled. "By my father's
tomb," said he, extending his hand over the head of the
young girl, "I swear to you, Haidee, that if any misfortune
happens, it will not be to me."
"I believe you, my lord, as implicitly as if God had spoken to
me," said the young girl, presenting her forehead to him.
Monte Cristo pressed on that pure beautiful forehead a kiss
which made two hearts throb at once, the one violently, the
other heavily. "Oh," murmured the count, "shall I then be
permitted to love again? Ask M. de Morcerf into the
drawing-room," said he to Baptistin, while he led the
beautiful Greek girl to a private staircase.
We must explain this visit, which although expected by
Monte Cristo, is unexpected to our readers. While Mercedes,
as we have said, was making a similar inventory of her
property to Albert's, while she was arranging her jewels,
shutting her drawers, collecting her keys, to leave everything
in perfect order, she did not perceive a pale and sinister face
at a glass door which threw light into the passage, from
which everything could be both seen and heard. He who
was thus looking, without being heard or seen, probably
heard and saw all that passed in Madame de Morcerf's
apartments. From that glass door the pale-faced man went to
the count's bedroom and raised with a constricted hand the
curtain of a window overlooking the court-yard. He
remained there ten minutes, motionless and dumb, listening
to the beating of his own heart. For him those ten minutes
were very long. It was then Albert, returning from his
meeting with the count, perceived his father watching for his
arrival behind a curtain, and turned aside. The count's eye
expanded; he knew Albert had insulted the count dreadfully,
and that in every country in the world such an insult would
lead to a deadly duel. Albert returned safely -- then the
count was revenged.
An indescribable ray of joy illumined that wretched
countenance like the last ray of the sun before it disappears
behind the clouds which bear the aspect, not of a downy
couch, but of a tomb. But as we have said, he waited in vain
for his son to come to his apartment with the account of his
triumph. He easily understood why his son did not come to
see him before he went to avenge his father's honor; but
when that was done, why did not his son come and throw
himself into his arms?

apparently given previous orders, for as he reached the
bottom step his carriage came from the coach-house ready
for him. The valet threw into the carriage his military cloak,
in which two swords were wrapped, and, shutting the door,
he took his seat by the side of the coachman. The coachman
stooped down for his orders.
"To the Champs Elysees," said the general; "the Count of
Monte Cristo's. Hurry!" The horses bounded beneath the
whip; and in five minutes they stopped before the count's
door. M. de Morcerf opened the door himself, and as the
carriage rolled away he passed up the walk, rang, and
entered the open door with his servant.
A moment afterwards, Baptistin announced the Count of
Morcerf to Monte Cristo, and the latter, leading Haidee aside,
ordered that Morcerf be asked into the drawing-room. The
general was pacing the room the third time when, in turning,
he perceived Monte Cristo at the door. "Ah, it is M. de
Morcerf," said Monte Cristo quietly; "I thought I had not
heard aright."
"Yes, it is I," said the count, whom a frightful contraction of
the lips prevented from articulating freely.
"May I know the cause which procures me the pleasure of
seeing M. de Morcerf so early?"
"Had you not a meeting with my son this morning?" asked
the general.
"I had," replied the count.
"And I know my son had good reasons to wish to fight with
you, and to endeavor to kill you."
"Yes, sir, he had very good ones; but you see that in spite of
them he has not killed me, and did not even fight."
"Yet he considered you the cause of his father's dishonor, the
cause of the fearful ruin which has fallen on my house."
"It is true, sir," said Monte Cristo with his dreadful calmness;
"a secondary cause, but not the principal."
"Doubtless you made, then, some apology or explanation?"
"I explained nothing, and it is he who apologized to me."
"But to what do you attribute this conduct?"
"To the conviction, probably, that there was one more guilty
than I."
"And who was that?"
"His father."
"That may be," said the count, turning pale; "but you know
the guilty do not like to find themselves convicted."
"I know it, and I expected this result."
"You expected my son would be a coward?" cried the count.
"M. Albert de Morcerf is no coward!" said Monte Cristo.
"A man who holds a sword in his hand, and sees a mortal
enemy within reach of that sword, and does not fight, is a
coward! Why is he not here that I may tell him so?"
"Sir." replied Monte Cristo coldly, "I did not expect that you
had come here to relate to me your little family affairs. Go
and tell M. Albert that, and he may know what to answer
you."

"Oh, no, no," said the general, smiling faintly, "I did not
come for that purpose; you are right. I came to tell you that I
It was then, when the count could not see Albert, that he sent also look upon you as my enemy. I came to tell you that I
for his servant, who he knew was authorized not to conceal hate you instinctively; that it seems as if I had always known
anything from him. Ten minutes afterwards, General you, and always hated you; and, in short, since the young
Morcerf was seen on the steps in a black coat with a military people of the present day will not fight, it remains for us to
collar, black pantaloons, and black gloves. He had
375


CHAPTER 92

do so. Do you think so, sir?"
"Certainly. And when I told you I had foreseen the result, it
is the honor of your visit I alluded to."
"So much the better. Are you prepared?"
"Yes, sir."

THE SUICIDE
when he found a table to support his clinched hand.
"Fernand," cried he, "of my hundred names I need only tell
you one, to overwhelm you! But you guess it now, do you
not? -- or, rather, you remember it? For, notwithstanding all
my sorrows and my tortures, I show you to-day a face which
the happiness of revenge makes young again -- a face you
must often have seen in your dreams since your marriage
with Mercedes, my betrothed!"

"You know that we shall fight till one of us is dead," said the
general, whose teeth were clinched with rage. "Until one of
us dies," repeated Monte Cristo, moving his head slightly up The general, with his head thrown back, hands extended,
gaze fixed, looked silently at this dreadful apparition; then
and down.
seeking the wall to support him, he glided along close to it
"Let us start, then; we need no witnesses."
until he reached the door, through which he went out
"Very true," said Monte Cristo; "it is unnecessary, we know backwards, uttering this single mournful, lamentable,
distressing cry, -- "Edmond Dantes!" Then, with sighs which
each other so well!"
were unlike any human sound, he dragged himself to the
"On the contrary," said the count, "we know so little of each
door, reeled across the court-yard, and falling into the arms
other."
of his valet, he said in a voice scarcely intelligible, -- "Home,
"Indeed?" said Monte Cristo, with the same indomitable home." The fresh air and the shame he felt at having exposed
coolness; "let us see. Are you not the soldier Fernand who himself before his servants, partly recalled his senses, but the
deserted on the eve of the battle of Waterloo? Are you not ride was short, and as he drew near his house all his
the Lieutenant Fernand who served as guide and spy to the wretchedness revived. He stopped at a short distance from
French army in Spain? Are you not the Captain Fernand the house and alighted.
who betrayed, sold, and murdered his benefactor, Ali? And
The door was wide open, a hackney-coach was standing in
have
not
all
these
Fernands,
united,
made
the middle of the yard -- a strange sight before so noble a
Lieutenant-General, the Count of Morcerf, peer of France?"
mansion; the count looked at it with terror, but without
"Oh," cried the general, as it branded with a hot iron, "wretch, daring to inquire its meaning, he rushed towards his
-- to reproach me with my shame when about, perhaps, to apartment. Two persons were coming down the stairs; he
kill me! No, I did not say I was a stranger to you. I know had only time to creep into an alcove to avoid them. It was
well, demon, that you have penetrated into the darkness of Mercedes leaning on her son's arm and leaving the house.
the past, and that you have read, by the light of what torch I They passed close by the unhappy being, who, concealed
know not, every page of my life; but perhaps I may be more behind the damask curtain, almost felt Mercedes dress brush
honorable in my shame than you under your pompous past him, and his son's warm breath, pronouncing these
coverings. No -- no, I am aware you know me; but I know words, -- "Courage, mother! Come, this is no longer our
you only as an adventurer sewn up in gold and jewellery. home!" The words died away, the steps were lost in the
You call yourself in Paris the Count of Monte Cristo; in Italy, distance. The general drew himself up, clinging to the
Sinbad the Sailor; in Malta, I forget what. But it is your real curtain; he uttered the most dreadful sob which ever escaped
name I want to know, in the midst of your hundred names, from the bosom of a father abandoned at the same time by
that I may pronounce it when we meet to fight, at the his wife and son. He soon heard the clatter of the iron step of
moment when I plunge my sword through your heart."
the hackney-coach, then the coachman's voice, and then the
The Count of Monte Cristo turned dreadfully pale; his eye rolling of the heavy vehicle shook the windows. He darted to
seemed to burn with a devouring fire. He leaped towards a his bedroom to see once more all he had loved in the world;
dressing-room near his bedroom, and in less than a moment, but the hackney-coach drove on and the head of neither
tearing off his cravat, his coat and waistcoat, he put on a Mercedes nor her son appeared at the window to take a last
sailor's jacket and hat, from beneath which rolled his long look at the house or the deserted father and husband. And at
black hair. He returned thus, formidable and implacable, the very moment when the wheels of that coach crossed the
advancing with his arms crossed on his breast, towards the gateway a report was heard, and a thick smoke escaped
general, who could not understand why he had disappeared, through one of the panes of the window, which was broken
but who on seeing him again, and feeling his teeth chatter by the explosion.
and his legs sink under him, drew back, and only stopped

376


Chapter 93

W

e may easily conceive where Morrel's appointment
was. On leaving Monte Cristo he walked slowly
towards Villefort's; we say slowly, for Morrel had more than
half an hour to spare to go five hundred steps, but he had
hastened to take leave of Monte Cristo because he wished to
be alone with his thoughts. He knew his time well -- the
hour when Valentine was giving Noirtier his breakfast, and
was sure not to be disturbed in the performance of this pious
duty. Noirtier and Valentine had given him leave to go twice
a week, and he was now availing himself of that permission.
He had arrived; Valentine was expecting him. Uneasy and
almost crazed, she seized his hand and led him to her
grandfather. This uneasiness, amounting almost to frenzy,
arose from the report Morcerf's adventure had made in the
world, for the affair at the opera was generally known. No
one at Villefort's doubted that a duel would ensue from it.
Valentine, with her woman's instinct, guessed that Morrel
would be Monte Cristo's second, and from the young man's
well-known courage and his great affection for the count,
she feared that he would not content himself with the
passive part assigned to him. We may easily understand
how eagerly the particulars were asked for, given, and
received; and Morrel could read an indescribable joy in the
eyes of his beloved, when she knew that the termination of
this affair was as happy as it was unexpected.

Valentine
I take four. Grandpapa says it is a panacea." Valentine
smiled, but it was evident that she suffered.
Maximilian, in his devotedness, gazed silently at her. She
was very beautiful, but her usual pallor had increased; her
eyes were more brilliant than ever, and her hands, which
were generally white like mother-of-pearl, now more
resembled wax, to which time was adding a yellowish hue.
From Valentine the young man looked towards Noirtier. The
latter watched with strange and deep interest the young girl,
absorbed by her affection, and he also, like Morrel, followed
those traces of inward suffering which was so little
perceptible to a common observer that they escaped the
notice of every one but the grandfather and the lover.
"But," said Morrel, "I thought this mixture, of which you now
take four spoonfuls, was prepared for M. Noirtier?"

"I know it is very bitter," said Valentine; "so bitter, that all I
drink afterwards appears to have the same taste." Noirtier
looked inquiringly at his granddaughter. "Yes, grandpapa,"
said Valentine; "it is so. Just now, before I came down to you,
I drank a glass of sugared water; I left half, because it
seemed so bitter." Noirtier turned pale, and made a sign that
he wished to speak. Valentine rose to fetch the dictionary.
Noirtier watched her with evident anguish. In fact, the blood
was rushing to the young girl's head already, her cheeks
"Now," said Valentine, motioning to Morrel to sit down near were becoming red. "Oh," cried she, without losing any of
her grandfather, while she took her seat on his footstool, -- her cheerfulness, "this is singular! I can't see! Did the sun
"now let us talk about our own affairs. You know, shine in my eyes?" And she leaned against the window.
Maximilian, grandpapa once thought of leaving this house, "The sun is not shining," said Morrel, more alarmed by
and taking an apartment away from M. de Villefort's."
Noirtier's expression than by Valentine's indisposition. He
ran towards her. The young girl smiled. "Cheer up," said she
to Noirtier. "Do not be alarmed, Maximilian; it is nothing,
and has already passed away. But listen! Do I not hear a
"Well," said Valentine, "you may approve again, for
carriage in the court-yard?" She opened Noirtier's door, ran
grandpapa is again thinking of it."
to a window in the passage, and returned hastily. "Yes," said
"Bravo," said Maximilian.
she, "it is Madame Danglars and her daughter, who have
come to call on us. Good-by; -- I must run away, for they
"And do you know," said Valentine, "what reason grandpapa
would send here for me, or, rather, farewell till I see you
gives for leaving this house." Noirtier looked at Valentine to
again. Stay with grandpapa, Maximilian; I promise you not
impose silence, but she did not notice him; her looks, her
to persuade them to stay."
eyes, her smile, were all for Morrel.
Morrel watched her as she left the room; he heard her ascend
"Oh, whatever may be M. Noirtier's reason," answered
the little staircase which led both to Madame de Villefort's
Morrel, "I can readily believe it to be a good one."
apartments and to hers. As soon as she was gone, Noirtier
"An excellent one," said Valentine. "He pretends the air of made a sign to Morrel to take the dictionary. Morrel obeyed;
the Faubourg St. Honore is not good for me."
guided by Valentine, he had learned how to understand the
"Indeed?" said Morrel; "in that M. Noirtier may be right; you old man quickly. Accustomed, however, as he was to the
work, he had to repeat most of the letters of the alphabet and
have not seemed to be well for the last fortnight."
to find every word in the dictionary, so that it was ten
"Not very," said Valentine. "And grandpapa has become my minutes before the thought of the old man was translated by
physician, and I have the greatest confidence in him, because these words, "Fetch the glass of water and the decanter from
he knows everything."
Valentine's room."
"Do you then really suffer?" asked Morrel quickly.
Morrel rang immediately for the servant who had taken
"Yes," said Maximilian, "I recollect the project, of which I
highly approved."

"Oh, it must not be called suffering; I feel a general
uneasiness, that is all. I have lost my appetite, and my
stomach feels as if it were struggling to get accustomed to
something." Noirtier did not lose a word of what Valentine
said. "And what treatment do you adopt for this singular
complaint?"
"A very simple one," said Valentine. "I swallow every
morning a spoonful of the mixture prepared for my
grandfather. When I say one spoonful, I began by one -- now

Barrois's situation, and in Noirtier's name gave that order.
The servant soon returned. The decanter and the glass were
completely empty. Noirtier made a sign that he wished to
speak. "Why are the glass and decanter empty?" asked he;
"Valentine said she only drank half the glassful." The
translation of this new question occupied another five
minutes. "I do not know," said the servant, "but the
housemaid is in Mademoiselle Valentine's room: perhaps she
has emptied them."
377


CHAPTER 93


VALENTINE

"Ask her," said Morrel, translating Noirtier's thought this
time by his look. The servant went out, but returned almost
immediately. "Mademoiselle Valentine passed through the
room to go to Madame de Villefort's," said he; "and in
passing, as she was thirsty, she drank what remained in the
glass; as for the decanter, Master Edward had emptied that
to make a pond for his ducks." Noirtier raised his eyes to
heaven, as a gambler does who stakes his all on one stroke.
From that moment the old man's eyes were fixed on the door,
and did not quit it.

Albert claims and well deserves his share. It appears that
after having challenged M. de Monte Cristo at the Opera
yesterday, he apologized on the ground to-day."

"And then," said Eugenie, while turning over the leaves of
Madame de Villefort's album, "add that you have taken a
great fancy to the young man."

Meanwhile, Valentine, in a sort of excitement which she
could not quite understand, had crossed Edward's room
without noticing some trick of the child, and through her
own had reached the little staircase. She was within three
steps of the bottom; she already heard Morrel's voice, when
suddenly a cloud passed over her eyes, her stiffened foot
missed the step, her hands had no power to hold the baluster,
and falling against the wall she lost her balance wholly and
toppled to the floor. Morrel bounded to the door, opened it,
and found Valentine stretched out at the bottom of the stairs.
Quick as a flash, he raised her in his arms and placed her in a
chair. Valentine opened her eyes.

"Impossible," said Madame de Villefort.

"Ah, my dear friend," said Madame Danglars, with the same
simplicity we before noticed, "it is a fact. I heard it from M.
Debray, who was present at the explanation." Valentine also
knew the truth, but she did not answer. A single word had
reminded her that Morrel was expecting her in M. Noirtier's
room. Deeply engaged with a sort of inward contemplation,
It was indeed Madame Danglars and her daughter whom
Valentine had ceased for a moment to join in the
Valentine had seen; they had been ushered into Madame de
conversation. She would, indeed, have found it impossible to
Villefort's room, who had said she would receive them there.
repeat what had been said the last few minutes, when
That is why Valentine passed through her room, which was
suddenly Madame Danglars' hand, pressed on her arm,
on a level with Valentine's, and only separated from it by
aroused her from her lethargy.
Edward's. The two ladies entered the drawing-room with
that sort of official stiffness which preludes a formal "What is it?" said she, starting at Madame Danglars, touch as
communication. Among worldly people manner is she would have done from an electric shock. "It is, my dear
contagious. Madame de Villefort received them with equal Valentine," said the baroness, "that you are, doubtless,
solemnity. Valentine entered at this moment, and the suffering."
formalities were resumed. "My dear friend," said the "I?" said the young girl, passing her hand across her burning
baroness, while the two young people were shaking hands, forehead.
"I and Eugenie are come to be the first to announce to you
the approaching marriage of my daughter with Prince "Yes, look at yourself in that glass; you have turned pale and
Cavalcanti." Danglars kept up the title of prince. The popular then red successively, three or four times in one minute."
banker found that it answered better than count. "Allow me "Indeed," cried Eugenie, "you are very pale!"
to present you my sincere congratulations," replied Madame
"Oh, do not be alarmed; I have been so for many days."
de Villefort. "Prince Cavalcanti appears to be a young man of
Artless as she was, the young girl knew that this was an
rare qualities."
opportunity to leave, and besides, Madame de Villefort came
"Listen," said the baroness, smiling; "speaking to you as a to her assistance. "Retire, Valentine," said she; "you are really
friend I can say that the prince does not yet appear all he will suffering, and these ladies will excuse you; drink a glass of
be. He has about him a little of that foreign manner by which pure water, it will restore you." Valentine kissed Eugenie,
French persons recognize, at first sight, the Italian or German bowed to Madame Danglars, who had already risen to take
nobleman. Besides, he gives evidence of great kindness of her leave, and went out. "That poor child," said Madame de
disposition, much keenness of wit, and as to suitability, M. Villefort when Valentine was gone, "she makes me very
Danglars assures me that his fortune is majestic -- that is his uneasy, and I should not be astonished if she had some
word."
serious illness."

"And," said Madame de Villefort, "I need not ask you if you
share that fancy."

"I?" replied Eugenie with her usual candor. "Oh, not the least
in the world, madame! My wish was not to confine myself to
domestic cares, or the caprices of any man, but to be an artist,
and consequently free in heart, in person, and in thought."
Eugenie pronounced these words with so firm a tone that the
color mounted to Valentine's cheeks. The timid girl could not
understand that vigorous nature which appeared to have
"Oh, what a clumsy thing I am," said she with feverish
none of the timidities of woman.
volubility; "I don't know my way. I forgot there were three
"At any rate," said she, "since I am to be married whether I more steps before the landing."
will or not, I ought to be thankful to providence for having
released me from my engagement with M. Albert de Morcerf, "You have hurt yourself, perhaps," said Morrel. "What can I
or I should this day have been the wife of a dishonored do for you, Valentine?" Valentine looked around her; she
saw the deepest terror depicted in Noirtier's eyes. "Don't
man."
worry, dear grandpapa," said she, endeavoring to smile; "it is
"It is true," said the baroness, with that strange simplicity nothing -- it is nothing; I was giddy, that is all."
sometimes met with among fashionable ladies, and of which
plebeian intercourse can never entirely deprive them, -- "it is "Another attack of giddiness," said Morrel, clasping his
very true that had not the Morcerfs hesitated, my daughter hands. "Oh, attend to it, Valentine, I entreat you."
would have married Monsieur Albert. The general "But no," said Valentine, -- "no, I tell you it is all past, and it
depended much on it; he even came to force M. Danglars. was nothing. Now, let me tell you some news; Eugenie is to
We have had a narrow escape."
be married in a week, and in three days there is to be a grand
"But," said Valentine, timidly, "does all the father's shame feast, a betrothal festival. We are all invited, my father,
revert upon the son? Monsieur Albert appears to me quite Madame de Villefort, and I -- at least, I understood it so."
innocent of the treason charged against the general."
"Excuse me," said the implacable young girl, "Monsieur
378

"When will it be our turn to think of these things? Oh,
Valentine, you who have so much influence over your

grandpapa, try to make him answer -- Soon."

on Noirtier's lips, seemed to start from his eyes. Morrel
understood it; he knew he must call assistance. The young
"And do you," said Valentine, "depend on me to stimulate
man rang the bell violently; the housemaid who had been in
the tardiness and arouse the memory of grandpapa?"
Mademoiselle Valentine's room, and the servant who had
"Yes," cried Morrel, "make haste. So long as you are not mine, replaced Barrois, ran in at the same moment. Valentine was
Valentine, I shall always think I may lose you."
so pale, so cold, so inanimate that without listening to what
"Oh," replied Valentine with a convulsive movement, "oh, was said to them they were seized with the fear which
indeed, Maximilian, you are too timid for an officer, for a pervaded that house, and they flew into the passage crying
soldier who, they say, never knows fear. Ah, ha, ha!" she for help. Madame Danglars and Eugenie were going out at
burst into a forced and melancholy laugh, her arms stiffened that moment; they heard the cause of the disturbance. "I told
and twisted, her head fell back on her chair, and she you so!" exclaimed Madame de Villefort. "Poor child!"
remained motionless. The cry of terror which was stopped

379


CHAPTER 94


Chapter 94

MAXIMILIAN'S AVOWAL

Maximilian's Avowal

A

t the same moment M. de Villefort's voice was heard
calling from his study, "What is the matter?" Morrel
looked at Noirtier who had recovered his self-command, and
with a glance indicated the closet where once before under
somewhat similar circumstances, he had taken refuge. He
had only time to get his hat and throw himself breathless
into the closet when the procureur's footstep was heard in
the passage. Villefort sprang into the room, ran to Valentine,
and took her in his arms. "A physician, a physician, -- M.
d'Avrigny!" cried Villefort; "or rather I will go for him
myself." He flew from the apartment, and Morrel at the same
moment darted out at the other door. He had been struck to
the heart by a frightful recollection -- the conversation he
had heard between the doctor and Villefort the night of
Madame de Saint-Meran's death, recurred to him; these
symptoms, to a less alarming extent, were the same which
had preceded the death of Barrois. At the same time Monte
Cristo's voice seemed to resound in his ear with the words
he had heard only two hours before, "Whatever you want,
Morrel, come to me; I have great power." More rapidly than
thought, he darted down the Rue Matignon, and thence to
the Avenue des Champs Elysees.

meet him. "What is the matter, Maximilian?" asked he; "you
are pale, and the perspiration rolls from your forehead."
Morrel fell into a chair. "Yes," said he, "I came quickly; I
wanted to speak to you."

Meanwhile M. de Villefort arrived in a hired cabriolet at M.
d'Avrigny's door. He rang so violently that the porter was
alarmed. Villefort ran up-stairs without saying a word. The
porter knew him, and let him pass, only calling to him, "In
his study, Monsieur Procureur -- in his study!" Villefort
pushed, or rather forced, the door open. "Ah," said the
doctor, "is it you?"

"Oh, what a dreadful event!" cried Maximilian.

"Yes," said Villefort, closing the door after him, "it is I, who
am come in my turn to ask you if we are quite alone. Doctor,
my house is accursed!"

"Pity Albert also, Maximilian; for believe me he is the worthy
son of the countess. But let us return to yourself. You have
hastened to me -- can I have the happiness of being useful to
you?"

"What?" said the latter with apparent coolness, but with
deep emotion, "have you another invalid?"
"Yes, doctor," cried Villefort, clutching his hair, "yes!"
D'Avrigny's look implied, "I told you it would be so." Then
he slowly uttered these words, "Who is now dying in your
house? What new victim is going to accuse you of weakness
before God?" A mournful sob burst from Villefort's heart; he
approached the doctor, and seizing his arm, -- "Valentine,"
said he, "it is Valentine's turn!"
"Your daughter?" cried d'Avrigny with grief and surprise.
"You see you were deceived," murmured the magistrate;
"come and see her, and on her bed of agony entreat her
pardon for having suspected her."
"Each time you have applied to me," said the doctor, "it has
been too late; still I will go. But let us make haste, sir; with
the enemies you have to do with there is no time to be lost."

"Are all your family well?" asked the count, with an
affectionate benevolence, whose sincerity no one could for a
moment doubt.
"Thank you, count -- thank you," said the young man,
evidently embarrassed how to begin the conversation; "yes,
every one in my family is well."
"So much the better; yet you have something to tell me?"
replied the count with increased anxiety.
"Yes," said Morrel, "it is true; I have but now left a house
where death has just entered, to run to you."
"Are you then come from M. de Morcerf's?" asked Monte
Cristo.
"No," said Morrel; "is some one dead in his house?"
"The general has just blown his brains out," replied Monte
Cristo with great coolness.
"Not for the countess, or for Albert," said Monte Cristo; "a
dead father or husband is better than a dishonored one, -blood washes out shame."
"Poor countess," said Maximilian, "I pity her very much; she
is so noble a woman!"

"Yes, I need your help: that is I thought like a madman that
you could lend me your assistance in a case where God
alone can succor me."
"Tell me what it is," replied Monte Cristo.
"Oh," said Morrel, "I know not, indeed, if I may reveal this
secret to mortal ears, but fatality impels me, necessity
constrains me, count" -- Morrel hesitated. "Do you think I
love you?" said Monte Cristo, taking the young man's hand
affectionately in his.
"Oh, you encourage me, and something tells me there,"
placing his hand on his heart, "that I ought to have no secret
from you."
"You are right, Morrel; God is speaking to your heart, and
your heart speaks to you. Tell me what it says."
"Count, will you allow me to send Baptistin to inquire after
some one you know?"

"Oh, this time, doctor, you shall not have to reproach me
with weakness. This time I will know the assassin, and will "I am at your service, and still more my servants."
pursue him."
"Oh, I cannot live if she is not better."
"Let us try first to save the victim before we think of
revenging her," said d'Avrigny. "Come." The same cabriolet
which had brought Villefort took them back at full speed,
and at this moment Morrel rapped at Monte Cristo's door.
The count was in his study and was reading with an angry
look something which Bertuccio had brought in haste.
Hearing the name of Morrel, who had left him only two
hours before, the count raised his head, arose, and sprang to
380

"Shall I ring for Baptistin?"
"No, I will go and speak to him myself." Morrel went out,
called Baptistin, and whispered a few words to him. The
valet ran directly. "Well, have you sent?" asked Monte Cristo,
seeing Morrel return.
"Yes, and now I shall be more calm."

"You know I am waiting," said Monte Cristo, smiling.

"Perfectly well, my good friend; and I will prove it to you by
putting the dots to the `i,' or rather by naming the persons.
"Yes, and I will tell you. One evening I was in a garden; a
You were walking one evening in M. de Villefort's garden;
clump of trees concealed me; no one suspected I was there.
from what you relate, I suppose it to have been the evening
Two persons passed near me -- allow me to conceal their
of Madame de Saint-Meran's death. You heard M. de
names for the present; they were speaking in an undertone,
Villefort talking to M. d'Avrigny about the death of M. de
and yet I was so interested in what they said that I did not
Saint-Meran, and that no less surprising, of the countess. M.
lose a single word."
d'Avrigny said he believed they both proceeded from poison;
"This is a gloomy introduction, if I may judge from your and you, honest man, have ever since been asking your heart
pallor and shuddering, Morrel."
and sounding your conscience to know if you ought to
"Oh, yes, very gloomy, my friend. Some one had just died in expose or conceal this secret. Why do you torment them?
the house to which that garden belonged. One of the persons `Conscience, what hast thou to do with me?' as Sterne said.
whose conversation I overheard was the master of the house; My dear fellow, let them sleep on, if they are asleep; let them
the other, the physician. The former was confiding to the grow pale in their drowsiness, if they are disposed to do so,
latter his grief and fear, for it was the second time within a and pray do you remain in peace, who have no remorse to
month that death had suddenly and unexpectedly entered disturb you." Deep grief was depicted on Morrel's features;
that house which was apparently destined to destruction by he seized Monte Cristo's hand. "But it is beginning again, I
say!"
some exterminating angel, as an object of God's anger."
"Ah, indeed?" said Monte Cristo, looking earnestly at the "Well," said the Count, astonished at his perseverance, which
young man, and by an imperceptible movement turning his he could not understand, and looking still more earnestly at
chair, so that he remained in the shade while the light fell Maximilian, "let it begin again, -- it is like the house of the
full on Maximilian's face. "Yes," continued Morrel, "death Atreidae;* God has condemned them, and they must submit
to their punishment. They will all disappear, like the fabrics
had entered that house twice within one month."
children build with cards, and which fall, one by one, under
"And what did the doctor answer?" asked Monte Cristo.
the breath of their builder, even if there are two hundred of
"He replied -- he replied, that the death was not a natural them. Three months since it was M. de Saint-Meran;
Madame de Saint-Meran two months since; the other day it
one, and must be attributed" -was Barrois; to-day, the old Noirtier, or young Valentine."
"To what?"
* In the old Greek legend the Atreidae, or children of Atreus,
"To poison."
were doomed to punishment because of the abominable
"Indeed?" said Monte Cristo with a slight cough which in crime of their father. The Agamemnon of Aeschylus is based
moments of extreme emotion helped him to disguise a blush, on this legend.
or his pallor, or the intense interest with which he listened;
"You knew it?" cried Morrel, in such a paroxysm of terror
"indeed, Maximilian, did you hear that?"
that Monte Cristo started, -- he whom the falling heavens
"Yes, my dear count, I heard it; and the doctor added that if would have found unmoved; "you knew it, and said
another death occurred in a similar way he must appeal to nothing?"
justice." Monte Cristo listened, or appeared to do so, with the
"And what is it to me?" replied Monte Cristo, shrugging his
greatest calmness. "Well," said Maximilian, "death came a
shoulders; "do I know those people? and must I lose the one
third time, and neither the master of the house nor the
to save the other? Faith, no, for between the culprit and the
doctor said a word. Death is now, perhaps, striking a fourth
victim I have no choice."
blow. Count, what am I bound to do, being in possession of
"But I," cried Morrel, groaning with sorrow, "I love her!"
this secret?"
"My dear friend," said Monte Cristo, "you appear to be
relating an adventure which we all know by heart. I know
the house where you heard it, or one very similar to it; a
house with a garden, a master, a physician, and where there
have been three unexpected and sudden deaths. Well, I have
not intercepted your confidence, and yet I know all that as
well as you, and I have no conscientious scruples. No, it does
not concern me. You say an exterminating angel appears to
have devoted that house to God's anger -- well, who says
your supposition is not reality? Do not notice things which
those whose interest it is to see them pass over. If it is God's
justice, instead of his anger, which is walking through that
house, Maximilian, turn away your face and let his justice
accomplish its purpose." Morrel shuddered. There was
something mournful, solemn, and terrible in the count's
manner. "Besides," continued he, in so changed a tone that
no one would have supposed it was the same person
speaking -- "besides, who says that it will begin again?"

"You love? -- whom?" cried Monte Cristo, starting to his feet,
and seizing the two hands which Morrel was raising
towards heaven.
"I love most fondly -- I love madly -- I love as a man who
would give his life-blood to spare her a tear -- I love
Valentine de Villefort, who is being murdered at this
moment! Do you understand me? I love her; and I ask God
and you how I can save her?" Monte Cristo uttered a cry
which those only can conceive who have heard the roar of a
wounded lion. "Unhappy man," cried he, wringing his hands
in his turn; "you love Valentine, -- that daughter of an
accursed race!" Never had Morrel witnessed such an
expression -- never had so terrible an eye flashed before his
face -- never had the genius of terror he had so often seen,
either on the battle-field or in the murderous nights of
Algeria, shaken around him more dreadful fire. He drew
back terrified.

As for Monte Cristo, after this ebullition he closed his eyes as
if dazzled by internal light. In a moment he restrained
himself so powerfully that the tempestuous heaving of his
"Well, what do you wish me to do? Do you wish me, for breast subsided, as turbulent and foaming waves yield to the
instance, to give information to the procureur?" Monte Cristo sun's genial influence when the cloud has passed. This
uttered the last words with so much meaning that Morrel, silence, self-control, and struggle lasted about twenty
starting up, cried out, "You know of whom I speak, count, do seconds, then the count raised his pallid face. "See," said he,
"my dear friend, how God punishes the most thoughtless
you not?"
"It has returned, count," exclaimed Morrel; "that is why I
hastened to you."

381


CHAPTER 94


MAXIMILIAN'S AVOWAL

and unfeeling men for their indifference, by presenting
dreadful scenes to their view. I, who was looking on, an
eager and curious spectator, -- I, who was watching the
working of this mournful tragedy, -- I, who like a wicked
angel was laughing at the evil men committed protected by
secrecy (a secret is easily kept by the rich and powerful), I
am in my turn bitten by the serpent whose tortuous course I
was watching, and bitten to the heart!"
Morrel groaned. "Come, come," continued the count,
"complaints are unavailing, be a man, be strong, be full of
hope, for I am here and will watch over you." Morrel shook
his head sorrowfully. "I tell you to hope. Do you understand
me?" cried Monte Cristo. "Remember that I never uttered a
falsehood and am never deceived. It is twelve o'clock,
Maximilian; thank heaven that you came at noon rather than
in the evening, or to-morrow morning. Listen, Morrel -- it is
noon; if Valentine is not now dead, she will not die."

something to tell me?" asked he. The old man winked his
eyes expressively, which we may remember was his only
way of expressing his approval.
"Privately?"
"Yes."
"Well, I will remain with you." At this moment Villefort
returned, followed by the lady's maid; and after her came
Madame de Villefort.

"What is the matter, then, with this dear child? she has just
left me, and she complained of being indisposed, but I did
not think seriously of it." The young woman with tears in her
eyes and every mark of affection of a true mother,
approached Valentine and took her hand. D'Avrigny
continued to look at Noirtier; he saw the eyes of the old man
dilate and become round, his cheeks turn pale and tremble;
the perspiration stood in drops upon his forehead. "Ah," said
"How so?" cried Morrel, "when I left her dying?" Monte he, involuntarily following Noirtier's eyes, which were fixed
Cristo pressed his hands to his forehead. What was passing on Madame de Villefort, who repeated, -- "This poor child
in that brain, so loaded with dreadful secrets? What does the would be better in bed. Come, Fanny, we will put her to
angel of light or the angel of darkness say to that mind, at bed." M. d'Avrigny, who saw that would be a means of his
remaining alone with Noirtier, expressed his opinion that it
once implacable and generous? God only knows.
was the best thing that could be done; but he forbade that
Monte Cristo raised his head once more, and this time he
anything should be given to her except what he ordered.
was calm as a child awaking from its sleep. "Maximilian,"
said he, "return home. I command you not to stir -- attempt They carried Valentine away; she had revived, but could
nothing, not to let your countenance betray a thought, and I scarcely move or speak, so shaken was her frame by the
attack. She had, however, just power to give one parting
will send you tidings. Go."
look to her grandfather, who in losing her seemed to be
"Oh, count, you overwhelm me with that coolness. Have you,
resigning his very soul. D'Avrigny followed the invalid,
then, power against death? Are you superhuman? Are you
wrote a prescription, ordered Villefort to take a cabriolet, go
an angel?" And the young man, who had never shrunk from
in person to a chemist's to get the prescribed medicine, bring
danger, shrank before Monte Cristo with indescribable terror.
it himself, and wait for him in his daughter's room. Then,
But Monte Cristo looked at him with so melancholy and
having renewed his injunction not to give Valentine
sweet a smile, that Maximilian felt the tears filling his eyes. "I
anything, he went down again to Noirtier, shut the doors
can do much for you, my friend," replied the count. "Go; I
carefully, and after convincing himself that no one was
must be alone." Morrel, subdued by the extraordinary
listening, -- "Do you," said he, "know anything of this young
ascendancy Monte Cristo exercised over everything around
lady's illness?"
him, did not endeavor to resist it. He pressed the count's
hand and left. He stopped one moment at the door for "Yes," said the old man.
Baptistin, whom he saw in the Rue Matignon, and who was "We have no time to lose; I will question, and do you answer
running.
me." Noirtier made a sign that he was ready to answer. "Did
Meanwhile, Villefort and d'Avrigny had made all possible
haste, Valentine had not revived from her fainting fit on
their arrival, and the doctor examined the invalid with all
the care the circumstances demanded, and with an interest
which the knowledge of the secret intensified twofold.
Villefort, closely watching his countenance and his lips,
awaited the result of the examination. Noirtier, paler than
even the young girl, more eager than Villefort for the
decision, was watching also intently and affectionately. At
last d'Avrigny slowly uttered these words: -- "she is still
alive!"
"Still?" cried Villefort; "oh, doctor, what a dreadful word is
that."
"Yes," said the physician, "I repeat it; she is still alive, and I
am astonished at it."
"But is she safe?" asked the father.
"Yes, since she lives." At that moment d'Avrigny's glance
met Noirtier's eye. It glistened with such extraordinary joy,
so rich and full of thought, that the physician was struck. He
placed the young girl again on the chair, -- her lips were
scarcely discernible, they were so pale and white, as well as
her whole face, -- and remained motionless, looking at
Noirtier, who appeared to anticipate and commend all he
did. "Sir," said d'Avrigny to Villefort, "call Mademoiselle
Valentine's maid, if you please." Villefort went himself to
find her; and d'Avrigny approached Noirtier. "Have you
382

you anticipate the accident which has happened to your
granddaughter?"
"Yes." D'Avrigny reflected a moment; then approaching
Noirtier, -- "Pardon what I am going to say," added he, "but
no indication should be neglected in this terrible situation.
Did you see poor Barrois die?" Noirtier raised his eyes to
heaven. "Do you know of what he died!" asked d'Avrigny,
placing his hand on Noirtier's shoulder.
"Yes," replied the old man.
"Do you think he died a natural death?" A sort of smile was
discernible on the motionless lips of Noirtier.
"Then you have thought that Barrois was poisoned?"
"Yes."
"Do you think the poison he fell a victim to was intended for
him?"
"No."
"Do you think the same hand which unintentionally struck
Barrois has now attacked Valentine?"
"Yes."
"Then will she die too?" asked d'Avrigny, fixing his
penetrating gaze on Noirtier. He watched the effect of this
question on the old man. "No," replied he with an air of
triumph which would have puzzled the most clever diviner.

"Then you hope?" said d'Avrigny, with surprise.

would have died before assistance could have been procured.
The dose has been excessive, but she has only been shaken
"Yes."
by it; and this time, at any rate, Valentine will not die." A
"What do you hope?" The old man made him understand superhuman joy expanded the old man's eyes, which were
with his eyes that he could not answer. "Ah, yes, it is true," raised towards heaven with an expression of infinite
murmured d'Avrigny. Then, turning to Noirtier, -- "Do you gratitude. At this moment Villefort returned. "Here, doctor,"
hope the assassin will be tried?"
said he, "is what you sent me for."
"No."

"Was this prepared in your presence?"

"Then you hope the poison will take no effect on Valentine?"

"Yes," replied the procureur.

"Yes."

"Have you not let it go out of your hands?"

"It is no news to you," added d'Avrigny, "to tell you that an
attempt has been made to poison her?" The old man made a
sign that he entertained no doubt upon the subject. "Then
how do you hope Valentine will escape?" Noirtier kept his
eyes steadfastly fixed on the same spot. D'Avrigny followed
the direction and saw that they were fixed on a bottle
containing the mixture which he took every morning. "Ah,
indeed?" said d'Avrigny, struck with a sudden thought, "has
it occurred to you" -- Noirtier did not let him finish. "Yes,"
said he. "To prepare her system to resist poison?"

"No." D'Avrigny took the bottle, poured some drops of the
mixture it contained in the hollow of his hand, and
swallowed them. "Well," said he, "let us go to Valentine; I
will give instructions to every one, and you, M. de Villefort,
will yourself see that no one deviates from them."

At the moment when d'Avrigny was returning to Valentine's
room, accompanied by Villefort, an Italian priest, of serious
demeanor and calm and firm tone, hired for his use the
house adjoining the hotel of M. de Villefort. No one knew
how the three former tenants of that house left it. About two
"Yes."
hours afterwards its foundation was reported to be unsafe;
but the report did not prevent the new occupant establishing
"By accustoming her by degrees" -himself there with his modest furniture the same day at five
"Yes, yes, yes," said Noirtier, delighted to be understood.
o'clock. The lease was drawn up for three, six, or nine years
"Of course. I had told you that there was brucine in the by the new tenant, who, according to the rule of the
proprietor, paid six months in advance. This new tenant,
mixture I give you."
who, as we have said, was an Italian, was called Il Signor
"Yes."
Giacomo Busoni. Workmen were immediately called in, and
"And by accustoming her to that poison, you have that same night the passengers at the end of the faubourg
endeavored to neutralize the effect of a similar poison?" saw with surprise that carpenters and masons were occupied
Noirtier's joy continued. "And you have succeeded," in repairing the lower part of the tottering house.
exclaimed d'Avrigny. "Without that precaution Valentine

383


CHAPTER 95


Chapter 95

FATHER AND DAUGHTER

Father And Daughter

W

e saw in a preceding chapter how Madame Danglars
went formally to announce to Madame de Villefort the
approaching marriage of Eugenie Danglars and M. Andrea
Cavalcanti. This announcement, which implied or appeared
to imply, the approval of all the persons concerned in this
momentous affair, had been preceded by a scene to which
our readers must be admitted. We beg them to take one step
backward, and to transport themselves, the morning of that
day of great catastrophes, into the showy, gilded salon we
have before shown them, and which was the pride of its
owner, Baron Danglars. In this room, at about ten o'clock in
the morning, the banker himself had been walking to and fro
for some minutes thoughtfully and in evident uneasiness,
watching both doors, and listening to every sound. When his
patience was exhausted, he called his valet. "Etienne," said
he, "see why Mademoiselle Eugenie has asked me to meet
her in the drawing-room, and why she makes me wait so
long."
Having given this vent to his ill-humor, the baron became
more calm; Mademoiselle Danglars had that morning
requested an interview with her father, and had fixed on the
gilded drawing-room as the spot. The singularity of this step,
and above all its formality, had not a little surprised the
banker, who had immediately obeyed his daughter by
repairing first to the drawing-room. Etienne soon returned
from his errand. "Mademoiselle's lady's maid says, sir, that
mademoiselle is finishing her toilette, and will be here
shortly."
Danglars nodded, to signify that he was satisfied. To the
world and to his servants Danglars assumed the character of
the good-natured man and the indulgent father. This was
one of his parts in the popular comedy he was performing, -a make-up he had adopted and which suited him about as
well as the masks worn on the classic stage by paternal
actors, who seen from one side, were the image of geniality,
and from the other showed lips drawn down in chronic
ill-temper. Let us hasten to say that in private the genial side
descended to the level of the other, so that generally the
indulgent man disappeared to give place to the brutal
husband and domineering father. "Why the devil does that
foolish girl, who pretends to wish to speak to me, not come
into my study? and why on earth does she want to speak to
me at all?"
He was turning this thought over in his brain for the
twentieth time, when the door opened and Eugenie
appeared, attired in a figured black satin dress, her hair
dressed and gloves on, as if she were going to the Italian
Opera. "Well, Eugenie, what is it you want with me? and
why in this solemn drawing-room when the study is so
comfortable?"

a father's mind, and make him forget that there is in the
world an interest greater and more sacred than the good
opinion of his correspondents. I have, therefore, chosen this
drawing-room, where you see, smiling and happy in their
magnificent frames, your portrait, mine, my mother's, and all
sorts of rural landscapes and touching pastorals. I rely much
on external impressions; perhaps, with regard to you, they
are immaterial, but I should be no artist if I had not some
fancies."
"Very well," replied M. Danglars, who had listened to all this
preamble with imperturbable coolness, but without
understanding a word, since like every man burdened with
thoughts of the past, he was occupied with seeking the
thread of his own ideas in those of the speaker.
"There is, then, the second point cleared up, or nearly so,"
said Eugenie, without the least confusion, and with that
masculine pointedness which distinguished her gesture and
her language; "and you appear satisfied with the explanation.
Now, let us return to the first. You ask me why I have
requested this interview; I will tell you in two words, sir; I
will not marry count Andrea Cavalcanti."
Danglars leaped from his chair and raised his eyes and arms
towards heaven.
"Yes, indeed, sir," continued Eugenie, still quite calm; "you
are astonished, I see; for since this little affair began, I have
not manifested the slightest opposition, and yet I am always
sure, when the opportunity arrives, to oppose a determined
and absolute will to people who have not consulted me, and
things which displease me. However, this time, my
tranquillity, or passiveness as philosophers say, proceeded
from another source; it proceeded from a wish, like a
submissive and devoted daughter" (a slight smile was
observable on the purple lips of the young girl), "to practice
obedience."
"Well?" asked Danglars.
"Well, sir," replied Eugenie, "I have tried to the very last and
now that the moment has come, I feel in spite of all my
efforts that it is impossible."
"But," said Danglars, whose weak mind was at first quite
overwhelmed with the weight of this pitiless logic, marking
evident premeditation and force of will, "what is your reason
for this refusal, Eugenie? what reason do you assign?"

"My reason?" replied the young girl. "Well, it is not that the
man is more ugly, more foolish, or more disagreeable than
any other; no, M. Andrea Cavalcanti may appear to those
who look at men's faces and figures as a very good specimen
of his kind. It is not, either, that my heart is less touched by
him than any other; that would be a schoolgirl's reason,
"I quite understand why you ask, sir," said Eugenie, making which I consider quite beneath me. I actually love no one, sir;
a sign that her father might be seated, "and in fact your two you know it, do you not? I do not then see why, without real
questions suggest fully the theme of our conversation. I will necessity, I should encumber my life with a perpetual
answer them both, and contrary to the usual method, the last companion. Has not some sage said, `Nothing too much'?
first, because it is the least difficult. I have chosen the and another, `I carry all my effects with me'? I have been
drawing-room, sir, as our place of meeting, in order to avoid taught these two aphorisms in Latin and in Greek; one is, I
the disagreeable impressions and influences of a banker's believe, from Phaedrus, and the other from Bias. Well, my
study. Those gilded cashbooks, drawers locked like gates of dear father, in the shipwreck of life -- for life is an eternal
fortresses, heaps of bank-bills, come from I know not where, shipwreck of our hopes -- I cast into the sea my useless
and the quantities of letters from England, Holland, Spain, encumbrance, that is all, and I remain with my own will,
India, China, and Peru, have generally a strange influence on disposed to live perfectly alone, and consequently perfectly
free."
384

"Unhappy girl, unhappy girl!" murmured Danglars, turning presented yourself yesterday to ask for the thousand francs I
pale, for he knew from long experience the solidity of the give you monthly for pocket-money, you must know, my
obstacle he had so suddenly encountered.
dear young lady, that many things may be learned, useful
even to a girl who will not marry. There one may learn, for
"Unhappy girl," replied Eugenie, "unhappy girl, do you say,
instance, what, out of regard to your nervous susceptibility, I
sir? No, indeed; the exclamation appears quite theatrical and
will inform you of in the drawing-room, namely, that the
affected. Happy, on the contrary, for what am I in want of!
credit of a banker is his physical and moral life; that credit
The world calls me beautiful. It is something to be well
sustains him as breath animates the body; and M. de Monte
received. I like a favorable reception; it expands the
Cristo once gave me a lecture on that subject, which I have
countenance, and those around me do not then appear so
never forgotten. There we may learn that as credit sinks, the
ugly. I possess a share of wit, and a certain relative
body becomes a corpse, and this is what must happen very
sensibility, which enables me to draw from life in general,
soon to the banker who is proud to own so good a logician
for the support of mine, all I meet with that is good, like the
as you for his daughter." But Eugenie, instead of stooping,
monkey who cracks the nut to get at its contents. I am rich,
drew herself up under the blow. "Ruined?" said she.
for you have one of the first fortunes in France. I am your
only daughter, and you are not so exacting as the fathers of "Exactly, my daughter; that is precisely what I mean," said
the Porte Saint-Martin and Gaiete, who disinherit their Danglars, almost digging his nails into his breast, while he
daughters for not giving them grandchildren. Besides, the preserved on his harsh features the smile of the heartless
provident law has deprived you of the power to disinherit though clever man; "ruined -- yes, that is it."
me, at least entirely, as it has also of the power to compel me
"Ah!" said Eugenie.
to marry Monsieur This or Monsieur That. And so -- being,
beautiful, witty, somewhat talented, as the comic operas say, "Yes, ruined! Now it is revealed, this secret so full of horror,
and rich -- and that is happiness, sir -- why do you call me as the tragic poet says. Now, my daughter, learn from my
lips how you may alleviate this misfortune, so far as it will
unhappy?"
affect you."
Danglars, seeing his daughter smiling, and proud even to
insolence, could not entirely repress his brutal feelings, but "Oh," cried Eugenie, "you are a bad physiognomist, if you
they betrayed themselves only by an exclamation. Under the imagine I deplore on my own account the catastrophe of
fixed and inquiring gaze levelled at him from under those which you warn me. I ruined? and what will that signify to
beautiful black eyebrows, he prudently turned away, and me? Have I not my talent left? Can I not, like Pasta, Malibran,
calmed himself immediately, daunted by the power of a Grisi, acquire for myself what you would never have given
resolute mind. "Truly, my daughter," replied he with a smile, me, whatever might have been your fortune, a hundred or a
"you are all you boast of being, excepting one thing; I will hundred and fifty thousand livres per annum, for which I
not too hastily tell you which, but would rather leave you to shall be indebted to no one but myself; and which, instead of
guess it." Eugenie looked at Danglars, much surprised that being given as you gave me those poor twelve thousand
one flower of her crown of pride, with which she had so francs, with sour looks and reproaches for my prodigality,
superbly decked herself, should be disputed. "My daughter," will be accompanied with acclamations, with bravos, and
continued the banker, "you have perfectly explained to me with flowers? And if I do not possess that talent, which your
the sentiments which influence a girl like you, who is smiles prove to me you doubt, should I not still have that
determined she will not marry; now it remains for me to tell ardent love of independence, which will be a substitute for
you the motives of a father like me, who has decided that his wealth, and which in my mind supersedes even the instinct
daughter shall marry." Eugenie bowed, not as a submissive of self-preservation? No, I grieve not on my own account, I
shall always find a resource; my books, my pencils, my
daughter, but as an adversary prepared for a discussion.
piano, all the things which cost but little, and which I shall
"My daughter," continued Danglars, "when a father asks his
be able to procure, will remain my own.
daughter to choose a husband, he has always some reason
for wishing her to marry. Some are affected with the mania "Do you think that I sorrow for Madame Danglars?
of which you spoke just now, that of living again in their Undeceive yourself again; either I am greatly mistaken, or
grandchildren. This is not my weakness, I tell you at once; she has provided against the catastrophe which threatens
family joys have no charm for me. I may acknowledge this to you, and, which will pass over without affecting her. She has
a daughter whom I know to be philosophical enough to taken care for herself, -- at least I hope so, -- for her attention
understand my indifference, and not to impute it to me as a has not been diverted from her projects by watching over me.
She has fostered my independence by professedly indulging
crime."
my love for liberty. Oh, no, sir; from my childhood I have
"This is not to the purpose," said Eugenie; "let us speak
seen too much, and understood too much, of what has
candidly, sir; I admire candor."
passed around me, for misfortune to have an undue power
"Oh," said Danglars, "I can, when circumstances render it over me. From my earliest recollections, I have been beloved
desirable, adopt your system, although it may not be my by no one -- so much the worse; that has naturally led me to
general practice. I will therefore proceed. I have proposed to love no one -- so much the better -- now you have my
you to marry, not for your sake, for indeed I did not think of profession of faith."
you in the least at the moment (you admire candor, and will
"Then," said Danglars, pale with anger, which was not at all
now be satisfied, I hope); but because it suited me to marry
due to offended paternal love, -- "then, mademoiselle, you
you as soon as possible, on account of certain commercial
persist in your determination to accelerate my ruin?"
speculations I am desirous of entering into." Eugenie became
"Your ruin? I accelerate your ruin? What do you mean? I do
uneasy.
not understand you."
"It is just as I tell you, I assure you, and you must not be
angry with me, for you have sought this disclosure. I do not "So much the better, I have a ray of hope left; listen."
willingly enter into arithmetical explanations with an artist "I am all attention," said Eugenie, looking so earnestly at her
like you, who fears to enter my study lest she should imbibe father that it was an effort for the latter to endure her
disagreeable or anti-poetic impressions and sensations. But unrelenting gaze.
in that same banker's study, where you very willingly
385


CHAPTER 95


FATHER AND DAUGHTER

"M. Cavalcanti," continued Danglars, "is about to marry you,
and will place in my hands his fortune, amounting to three
million livres."
"That is admirable!" said Eugenie with sovereign contempt,
smoothing her gloves out one upon the other.
"You think I shall deprive you of those three millions," said
Danglars; "but do not fear it. They are destined to produce at
least ten. I and a brother banker have obtained a grant of a
railway, the only industrial enterprise which in these days
promises to make good the fabulous prospects that Law once
held out to the eternally deluded Parisians, in the fantastic
Mississippi scheme. As I look at it, a millionth part of a
railway is worth fully as much as an acre of waste land on
the banks of the Ohio. We make in our case a deposit, on a
mortgage, which is an advance, as you see, since we gain at
least ten, fifteen, twenty, or a hundred livres' worth of iron in
exchange for our money. Well, within a week I am to deposit
four millions for my share; the four millions, I promise you,
will produce ten or twelve."
"But during my visit to you the day before yesterday, sir,
which you appear to recollect so well," replied Eugenie, "I
saw you arranging a deposit -- is not that the term? -- of five
millions and a half; you even pointed it out to me in two
drafts on the treasury, and you were astonished that so
valuable a paper did not dazzle my eyes like lightning."
"Yes, but those five millions and a half are not mine, and are
only a proof of the great confidence placed in me; my title of
popular banker has gained me the confidence of charitable
institutions, and the five millions and a half belong to them;
at any other time I should not have hesitated to make use of
them, but the great losses I have recently sustained are well
known, and, as I told you, my credit is rather shaken. That
deposit may be at any moment withdrawn, and if I had
employed it for another purpose, I should bring on me a
disgraceful bankruptcy. I do not despise bankruptcies,
believe me, but they must be those which enrich, not those
which ruin. Now, if you marry M. Cavalcanti, and I get the
three millions, or even if it is thought I am going to get them,
my credit will be restored, and my fortune, which for the last
month or two has been swallowed up in gulfs which have
been opened in my path by an inconceivable fatality, will
revive. Do you understand me?"

Cavalcanti will bring without touching the money? This is
no act of selfishness, but of delicacy. I am willing to help
rebuild your fortune, but I will not be an accomplice in the
ruin of others."
"But since I tell you," cried Danglars, "that with these three
million" -"Do you expect to recover your position, sir, without
touching those three million?"
"I hope so, if the marriage should take place and confirm my
credit."
"Shall you be able to pay M. Cavalcanti the five hundred
thousand francs you promise for my dowry?"
"He shall receive then on returning from the mayor's."*
* The performance of the civil marriage.
"Very well!"
"What next? what more do you want?"
"I wish to know if, in demanding my signature, you leave me
entirely free in my person?"
"Absolutely."
"Then, as I said before, sir, -- very well; I am ready to marry
M. Cavalcanti."
"But what are you up to?"
"Ah, that is my affair. What advantage should I have over
you, if knowing your secret I were to tell you mine?"
Danglars bit his lips. "Then," said he, "you are ready to pay
the official visits, which are absolutely indispensable?"
"Yes," replied Eugenie.
"And to sign the contract in three days?"
"Yes."

"Then, in my turn, I also say, very well!" Danglars pressed
his daughter's hand in his. But, extraordinary to relate, the
father did not say, "Thank you, my child," nor did the
daughter smile at her father. "Is the conference ended?"
asked Eugenie, rising. Danglars motioned that he had
nothing more to say. Five minutes afterwards the piano
resounded to the touch of Mademoiselle d'Armilly's fingers,
and Mademoiselle Danglars was singing Brabantio's
"Perfectly; you pledge me for three millions, do you not?"
malediction on Desdemona. At the end of the piece Etienne
entered, and announced to Eugenie that the horses were in
"The greater the amount, the more flattering it is to you; it
the carriage, and that the baroness was waiting for her to
gives you an idea of your value."
pay her visits. We have seen them at Villefort's; they
"Thank you. One word more, sir; do you promise me to proceeded then on their course.
make what use you can of the report of the fortune M.

386


Chapter 96

T

hree days after the scene we have just described, namely
towards five o'clock in the afternoon of the day fixed for
the signature of the contract between Mademoiselle Eugenie
Danglars and Andrea Cavalcanti, -- whom the banker
persisted in calling prince, -- a fresh breeze was stirring the
leaves in the little garden in front of the Count of Monte
Cristo's house, and the count was preparing to go out. While
his horses were impatiently pawing the ground, -- held in by
the coachman, who had been seated a quarter of an hour on
his box, -- the elegant phaeton with which we are familiar
rapidly turned the angle of the entrance-gate, and cast out on
the doorsteps M. Andrea Cavalcanti, as decked up and gay
as if he were going to marry a princess. He inquired after the
count with his usual familiarity, and ascending lightly to the
second story met him at the top of the stairs. The count
stopped on seeing the young man. As for Andrea, he was
launched, and when he was once launched nothing stopped
him. "Ah, good morning, my dear count," said he. "Ah, M.
Andrea," said the latter, with his half-jesting tone; "how do
you do."
"Charmingly, as you see. I am come to talk to you about a
thousand things; but, first tell me, were you going out or just
returned?"
"I was going out, sir."
"Then, in order not to hinder you, I will get up with you if
you please in your carriage, and Tom shall follow with my
phaeton in tow."
"No," said the count, with an imperceptible smile of
contempt, for he had no wish to be seen in the young man's
society, -- "no; I prefer listening to you here, my dear M.
Andrea; we can chat better in-doors, and there is no
coachman to overhear our conversation." The count returned
to a small drawing-room on the first floor, sat down, and
crossing his legs motioned to the young man to take a seat
also. Andrea assumed his gayest manner. "You know, my
dear count," said he, "the ceremony is to take place this
evening. At nine o'clock the contract is to be signed at my
father-in-law's."
"Ah, indeed?" said Monte Cristo.
"What; is it news to you? Has not M. Danglars informed you
of the ceremony?"
"Oh, yes," said the count; "I received a letter from him
yesterday, but I do not think the hour was mentioned."
"Possibly my father-in-law trusted to its general notoriety."

The Contract
eve of entering into a sort of speculation already in vogue in
the United States and in England, but quite novel in France."
"Yes, yes, I know what you mean, -- the railway, of which he
has obtained the grant, is it not?"
"Precisely; it is generally believed he will gain ten millions
by that affair."
"Ten millions! Do you think so? It is magnificent!" said
Cavalcanti, who was quite confounded at the metallic sound
of these golden words. "Without reckoning," replied Monte
Cristo, "that all his fortune will come to you, and justly too,
since Mademoiselle Danglars is an only daughter. Besides,
your own fortune, as your father assured me, is almost equal
to that of your betrothed. But enough of money matters. Do
you know, M. Andrea, I think you have managed this affair
rather skilfully?"
"Not badly, by any means," said the young man; "I was born
for a diplomatist."
"Well, you must become a diplomatist; diplomacy, you know,
is something that is not to be acquired; it is instinctive. Have
you lost your heart?"
"Indeed, I fear it," replied Andrea, in the tone in which he
had heard Dorante or Valere reply to Alceste* at the Theatre
Francais.
"Is your love returned?"
* In Moliere's comedy, Le Misanthrope.
"I suppose so," said Andrea with a triumphant smile, "since I
am accepted. But I must not forget one grand point."
"Which?"
"That I have been singularly assisted."
"Nonsense."
"I have, indeed."
"By circumstances?"
"No; by you."
"By me? Not at all, prince," said Monte Cristo laying a
marked stress on the title, "what have I done for you? Are
not your name, your social position, and your merit
sufficient?"
"No," said Andrea, -- "no; it is useless for you to say so, count.
I maintain that the position of a man like you has done more
than my name, my social position, and my merit."

"Well," said Monte Cristo, "you are fortunate, M. Cavalcanti; "You are completely mistaken, sir," said Monte Cristo coldly,
it is a most suitable alliance you are contracting, and who felt the perfidious manoeuvre of the young man, and
understood the bearing of his words; "you only acquired my
Mademoiselle Danglars is a handsome girl."
protection after the influence and fortune of your father had
"Yes, indeed she is," replied Cavalcanti, in a very modest been ascertained; for, after all, who procured for me, who
tone.
had never seen either you or your illustrious father, the
"Above all, she is very rich, -- at least, I believe so," said pleasure of your acquaintance? -- two of my good friends,
Lord Wilmore and the Abbe Busoni. What encouraged me
Monte Cristo.
not to become your surety, but to patronize you? -- your
"Very rich, do you think?" replied the young man.
father's name, so well known in Italy and so highly honored.
"Doubtless; it is said M. Danglars conceals at least half of his Personally, I do not know you." This calm tone and perfect
fortune."
ease made Andrea feel that he was, for the moment,
"And he acknowledges fifteen or twenty millions," said restrained by a more muscular hand than his own, and that
the restraint could not be easily broken through.
Andrea with a look sparkling with joy.
"Without reckoning," added Monte Cristo, "that he is on the

"Oh, then my father has really a very large fortune,
387


CHAPTER 96


THE CONTRACT

count?"

"Well, like all Paris, I shall be there too," said the count.

"It appears so, sir," replied Monte Cristo.

"And will you sign the contract?"

"Do you know if the marriage settlement he promised me
has come?"

"I see no objection to that; my scruples do not go thus far."

"I have been advised of it."

"Well, since you will grant me no more, I must be content
with what you give me. But one word more, count."

"But the three millions?"

"What is it?"

"The three millions are probably on the road."

"Advice."

"Then I shall really have them?"

"Be careful; advice is worse than a service."

"Oh, well," said the count, "I do not think you have yet
known the want of money." Andrea was so surprised that he
pondered the matter for a moment. Then, arousing from his
revery, -- "Now, sir, I have one request to make to you,
which you will understand, even if it should be disagreeable
to you."

"Oh, you can give me this without compromising yourself."

"Proceed," said Monte Cristo.
"I have formed an acquaintance, thanks to my good fortune,
with many noted persons, and have, at least for the moment,
a crowd of friends. But marrying, as I am about to do, before
all Paris, I ought to be supported by an illustrious name, and
in the absence of the paternal hand some powerful one
ought to lead me to the altar; now, my father is not coming
to Paris, is he? He is old, covered with wounds, and suffers
dreadfully, he says, in travelling."
"Indeed?"
"Well, I am come to ask a favor of you."
"Of me?"
"Yes, of you."
"And pray what may it be?"
"Well, to take his part."
"Ah, my dear sir! What? -- after the varied relations I have
had the happiness to sustain towards you, can it be that you
know me so little as to ask such a thing? Ask me to lend you
half a million and, although such a loan is somewhat rare, on
my honor, you would annoy me less! Know, then, what I
thought I had already told you, that in participation in this
world's affairs, more especially in their moral aspects, the
Count of Monte Cristo has never ceased to entertain the
scruples and even the superstitions of the East. I, who have a
seraglio at Cairo, one at Smyrna, and one at Constantinople,
preside at a wedding? -- never!"
"Then you refuse me?"
"Decidedly; and were you my son or my brother I would
refuse you in the same way."
"But what must be done?" said Andrea, disappointed.
"You said just now that you had a hundred friends."
"Very true, but you introduced me at M. Danglars'."
"Not at all! Let us recall the exact facts. You met him at a
dinner party at my house, and you introduced yourself at his
house; that is a totally different affair."
"Yes, but, by my marriage, you have forwarded that."
"I? -- not in the least, I beg you to believe. Recollect what I
told you when you asked me to propose you. `Oh, I never
make matches, my dear prince, it is my settled principle.'"
Andrea bit his lips.
"But, at least, you will be there?"
"Will all Paris be there?"
"Oh, certainly."
388

"Tell me what it is."
"Is my wife's fortune five hundred thousand livres?"
"That is the sum M. Danglars himself announced."
"Must I receive it, or leave it in the hands of the notary?"
"This is the way such affairs are generally arranged when it
is wished to do them stylishly: Your two solicitors appoint a
meeting, when the contract is signed, for the next or the
following day; then they exchange the two portions, for
which they each give a receipt; then, when the marriage is
celebrated, they place the amount at your disposal as the
chief member of the alliance."
"Because," said Andrea, with a certain ill-concealed
uneasiness, "I thought I heard my father-in-law say that he
intended embarking our property in that famous railway
affair of which you spoke just now."
"Well," replied Monte Cristo, "it will be the way, everybody
says, of trebling your fortune in twelve months. Baron
Danglars is a good father, and knows how to calculate."
"In that case," said Andrea, "everything is all right, excepting
your refusal, which quite grieves me."
"You must attribute it only to natural scruples under similar
circumstances."
"Well," said Andrea, "let it be as you wish. This evening, then,
at nine o'clock."
"Adieu till then." Notwithstanding a slight resistance on the
part of Monte Cristo, whose lips turned pale, but who
preserved his ceremonious smile, Andrea seized the count's
hand, pressed it, jumped into his phaeton, and disappeared.
The four or five remaining hours before nine o'clock arrived,
Andrea employed in riding, paying visits, -- designed to
induce those of whom he had spoken to appear at the
banker's in their gayest equipages, -- dazzling them by
promises of shares in schemes which have since turned
every brain, and in which Danglars was just taking the
initiative. In fact, at half-past eight in the evening the grand
salon, the gallery adjoining, and the three other
drawing-rooms on the same floor, were filled with a
perfumed crowd, who sympathized but little in the event,
but who all participated in that love of being present
wherever there is anything fresh to be seen. An Academician
would say that the entertainments of the fashionable world
are collections of flowers which attract inconstant butterflies,
famished bees, and buzzing drones.
No one could deny that the rooms were splendidly
illuminated; the light streamed forth on the gilt mouldings
and the silk hangings; and all the bad taste of decorations,
which had only their richness to boast of, shone in its
splendor. Mademoiselle Eugenie was dressed with elegant
simplicity in a figured white silk dress, and a white rose half
concealed in her jet black hair was her only ornament,
unaccompanied by a single jewel. Her eyes, however,
betrayed that perfect confidence which contradicted the

girlish simplicity of this modest attire. Madame Danglars
was chatting at a short distance with Debray, Beauchamp,
and Chateau-Renaud.

prepared for the signature; it was a gilt table supported on
lions' claws. One of the notaries sat down, the other
remained standing. They were about to proceed to the
reading of the contract, which half Paris assembled was to
Debray was admitted to the house for this grand ceremony,
sign. All took their places, or rather the ladies formed a circle,
but on the same plane with every one else, and without any
while the gentlemen (more indifferent to the restraints of
particular privilege. M. Danglars, surrounded by deputies
what Boileau calls the "energetic style") commented on the
and men connected with the revenue, was explaining a new
feverish agitation of Andrea, on M. Danglars' riveted
theory of taxation which he intended to adopt when the
attention, Eugenie's composure, and the light and sprightly
course of events had compelled the government to call him
manner in which the baroness treated this important affair.
into the ministry. Andrea, on whose arm hung one of the
most consummate dandies of the opera, was explaining to The contract was read during a profound silence. But as soon
him rather cleverly, since he was obliged to be bold to as it was finished, the buzz was redoubled through all the
appear at ease, his future projects, and the new luxuries he drawing-rooms; the brilliant sums, the rolling millions
meant to introduce to Parisian fashions with his hundred which were to be at the command of the two young people,
and seventy-five thousand livres per annum.
and which crowned the display of the wedding presents and
the young lady's diamonds, which had been made in a room
The crowd moved to and fro in the rooms like an ebb and
entirely appropriated for that purpose, had exercised to the
flow of turquoises, rubies, emeralds, opals, and diamonds.
full their delusions over the envious assembly. Mademoiselle
As usual, the oldest women were the most decorated, and
Danglars' charms were heightened in the opinion of the
the ugliest the most conspicuous. If there was a beautiful lily,
young men, and for the moment seemed to outvie the sun in
or a sweet rose, you had to search for it, concealed in some
splendor. As for the ladies, it is needless to say that while
corner behind a mother with a turban, or an aunt with a bird
they coveted the millions, they thought they did not need
of paradise.
them for themselves, as they were beautiful enough without
At each moment, in the midst of the crowd, the buzzing, and them. Andrea, surrounded by his friends, complimented,
the laughter, the door-keeper's voice was heard announcing flattered, beginning to believe in the reality of his dream,
some name well known in the financial department, was almost bewildered. The notary solemnly took the pen,
respected in the army, or illustrious in the literary world, flourished it above his head, and said, "Gentlemen, we are
and which was acknowledged by a slight movement in the about to sign the contract."
different groups. But for one whose privilege it was to
agitate that ocean of human waves, how many were received
with a look of indifference or a sneer of disdain! At the The baron was to sign first, then the representative of M.
moment when the hand of the massive time-piece, Cavalcanti, senior, then the baroness, afterwards the "future
representing Endymion asleep, pointed to nine on its golden couple," as they are styled in the abominable phraseology of
face, and the hammer, the faithful type of mechanical legal documents. The baron took the pen and signed, then
thought, struck nine times, the name of the Count of Monte the representative. The baroness approached, leaning on
Cristo resounded in its turn, and as if by an electric shock all Madame de Villefort's arm. "My dear," said she, as she took
the assembly turned towards the door.
the pen, "is it not vexatious? An unexpected incident, in the
affair of murder and theft at the Count of Monte Cristo's, in
The count was dressed in black and with his habitual
which he nearly fell a victim, deprives us of the pleasure of
simplicity; his white waistcoat displayed his expansive noble
seeing M. de Villefort."
chest and his black stock was singularly noticeable because
of its contrast with the deadly paleness of his face. His only "Indeed?" said M. Danglars, in the same tone in which he
jewellery was a chain, so fine that the slender gold thread would have said, "Oh, well, what do I care?"
was scarcely perceptible on his white waistcoat. A circle was
"As a matter of fact," said Monte Cristo, approaching, "I am
immediately formed around the door. The count perceived
much afraid that I am the involuntary cause of his absence."
at one glance Madame Danglars at one end of the
drawing-room, M. Danglars at the other, and Eugenie in "What, you, count?" said Madame Danglars, signing; "if you
front of him. He first advanced towards the baroness, who are, take care, for I shall never forgive you." Andrea pricked
was chatting with Madame de Villefort, who had come alone, up his ears.
Valentine being still an invalid; and without turning aside, "But it is not my fault, as I shall endeavor to prove." Every
so clear was the road left for him, he passed from the one listened eagerly; Monte Cristo who so rarely opened his
baroness to Eugenie, whom he complimented in such rapid lips, was about to speak. "You remember," said the count,
and measured terms, that the proud artist was quite struck. during the most profound silence, "that the unhappy wretch
Near her was Mademoiselle Louise d'Armilly, who thanked who came to rob me died at my house; the supposition is
the count for the letters of introduction he had so kindly that he was stabbed by his accomplice, on attempting to
given her for Italy, which she intended immediately to make leave it."
use of. On leaving these ladies he found himself with
"Yes," said Danglars.
Danglars, who had advanced to meet him.
Having accomplished these three social duties, Monte Cristo "In order that his wounds might be examined he was
stopped, looking around him with that expression peculiar undressed, and his clothes were thrown into a corner, where
to a certain class, which seems to say, "I have done my duty, the police picked them up, with the exception of the
now let others do theirs." Andrea, who was in an adjoining waistcoat, which they overlooked." Andrea turned pale, and
room, had shared in the sensation caused by the arrival of drew towards the door; he saw a cloud rising in the horizon,
Monte Cristo, and now came forward to pay his respects to which appeared to forebode a coming storm.
the count. He found him completely surrounded; all were
eager to speak to him, as is always the case with those whose
words are few and weighty. The solicitors arrived at this
moment and arranged their scrawled papers on the velvet
cloth embroidered with gold which covered the table

"Well, this waistcoat was discovered to-day, covered with
blood, and with a hole over the heart." The ladies screamed,
and two or three prepared to faint. "It was brought to me. No
one could guess what the dirty rag could be; I alone
suspected that it was the waistcoat of the murdered man. My
389


CHAPTER 96


THE CONTRACT

valet, in examining this mournful relic, felt a paper in the by his Christian name.
pocket and drew it out; it was a letter addressed to you,
"Call the prince; inform him that it is his turn to sign," cried
baron."
Danglars to one of the floorkeepers.
"To me?" cried Danglars.
But at the same instant the crowd of guests rushed in alarm
"Yes, indeed, to you; I succeeded in deciphering your name into the principal salon as if some frightful monster had
under the blood with which the letter was stained," replied entered the apartments, quaerens quem devoret. There was,
Monte Cristo, amid the general outburst of amazement.
indeed, reason to retreat, to be alarmed, and to scream. An
officer was placing two soldiers at the door of each
"But," asked Madame Danglars, looking at her husband with
drawing-room, and was advancing towards Danglars,
uneasiness, "how could that prevent M. de Villefort" -preceded by a commissary of police, girded with his scarf.
"In this simple way, madame," replied Monte Cristo; "the Madame Danglars uttered a scream and fainted. Danglars,
waistcoat and the letter were both what is termed who thought himself threatened (certain consciences are
circumstantial evidence; I therefore sent them to the king's never calm), -- Danglars even before his guests showed a
attorney. You understand, my dear baron, that legal countenance of abject terror.
methods are the safest in criminal cases; it was, perhaps,
"What is the matter, sir?" asked Monte Cristo, advancing to
some plot against you." Andrea looked steadily at Monte
meet the commissioner.
Cristo and disappeared in the second drawing-room.
"Which of you gentlemen," asked the magistrate, without
"Possibly," said Danglars; "was not this murdered man an
replying to the count, "answers to the name of Andrea
old galley-slave?"
Cavalcanti?" A cry of astonishment was heard from all parts
"Yes," replied the count; "a felon named Caderousse." of the room. They searched; they questioned. "But who then
Danglars turned slightly pale; Andrea reached the anteroom is Andrea Cavalcanti?" asked Danglars in amazement.
beyond the little drawing-room.
"A galley-slave, escaped from confinement at Toulon."
"But go on signing," said Monte Cristo; "I perceive that my
"And what crime has he committed?"
story has caused a general emotion, and I beg to apologize to
you, baroness, and to Mademoiselle Danglars." The baroness, "He is accused," said the commissary with his inflexible
who had signed, returned the pen to the notary. "Prince voice, "of having assassinated the man named Caderousse,
Cavalcanti," said the latter; "Prince Cavalcanti, where are his former companion in prison, at the moment he was
you?"
making his escape from the house of the Count of Monte
Cristo." Monte Cristo cast a rapid glance around him.
"Andrea, Andrea," repeated several young people, who were
Andrea was gone.
already on sufficiently intimate terms with him to call him

390


Chapter 97

The Departure For Belgium

A

few minutes after the scene of confusion produced in
the salons of M. Danglars by the unexpected
appearance of the brigade of soldiers, and by the disclosure
which had followed, the mansion was deserted with as
much rapidity as if a case of plague or of cholera morbus had
broken out among the guests. In a few minutes, through all
the doors, down all the staircases, by every exit, every one
hastened to retire, or rather to fly; for it was a situation
where the ordinary condolences, -- which even the best
friends are so eager to offer in great catastrophes, -- were
seen to be utterly futile. There remained in the banker's
house only Danglars, closeted in his study, and making his
statement to the officer of gendarmes; Madame Danglars,
terrified, in the boudoir with which we are acquainted; and
Eugenie, who with haughty air and disdainful lip had
retired to her room with her inseparable companion,
Mademoiselle Louise d'Armilly. As for the numerous
servants (more numerous that evening than usual, for their
number was augmented by cooks and butlers from the Cafe
de Paris), venting on their employers their anger at what
they termed the insult to which they had been subjected,
they collected in groups in the hall, in the kitchens, or in
their rooms, thinking very little of their duty, which was
thus naturally interrupted. Of all this household, only two
persons deserve our notice; these are Mademoiselle Eugenie
Danglars and Mademoiselle Louise d'Armilly.
The betrothed had retired, as we said, with haughty air,
disdainful lip, and the demeanor of an outraged queen,
followed by her companion, who was paler and more
disturbed than herself. On reaching her room Eugenie
locked her door, while Louise fell on a chair. "Ah, what a
dreadful thing," said the young musician; "who would have
suspected it? M. Andrea Cavalcanti a murderer -- a
galley-slave escaped -- a convict!" An ironical smile curled
the lip of Eugenie. "In truth I was fated," said she. "I escaped
the Morcerf only to fall into the Cavalcanti."
"Oh, do not confound the two, Eugenie."

"Did you not yet know me? Come, Louise, let us talk of our
affairs. The post-chaise" -"Was happily bought three days since."
"Have you had it sent where we are to go for it?"
"Yes."
"Our passport?"
"Here it is."
And Eugenie, with her usual precision, opened a printed
paper, and read, -"M. Leon d'Armilly, twenty years of age; profession, artist;
hair black, eyes black; travelling with his sister."
"Capital! How did you get this passport?"
"When I went to ask M. de Monte Cristo for letters to the
directors of the theatres at Rome and Naples, I expressed my
fears of travelling as a woman; he perfectly understood them,
and undertook to procure for me a man's passport, and two
days after I received this, to which I have added with my
own hand, `travelling with his sister.'"
"Well," said Eugenie cheerfully, "we have then only to pack
up our trunks; we shall start the evening of the signing of the
contract, instead of the evening of the wedding -- that is all."
"But consider the matter seriously, Eugenie!"
"Oh, I am done with considering! I am tired of hearing only
of market reports, of the end of the month, of the rise and fall
of Spanish funds, of Haitian bonds. Instead of that, Louise -do you understand? -- air, liberty, melody of birds, plains of
Lombardy, Venetian canals, Roman palaces, the Bay of
Naples. How much have we, Louise?" The young girl to
whom this question was addressed drew from an inlaid
secretary a small portfolio with a lock, in which she counted
twenty-three bank-notes.
"Twenty-three thousand francs," I said she.

"And as much, at least, in pearls, diamonds, and jewels," said
"Hold your tongue! The men are all infamous, and I am
Eugenie. "We are rich. With forty-five thousand francs we
happy to be able now to do more than detest them -- I
can live like princesses for two years, and comfortably for
despise them."
four; but before six months -- you with your music, and I
"What shall we do?" asked Louise.
with my voice -- we shall double our capital. Come, you
shall take charge of the money, I of the jewel-box; so that if
"What shall we do?"
one of us had the misfortune to lose her treasure, the other
"Yes."
would still have hers left. Now, the portmanteau -- let us
"Why, the same we had intended doing three days since -- make haste -- the portmanteau!"
set off."
"Stop!" said Louise, going to listen at Madame Danglars'
"What? -- although you are not now going to be married,
you intend still" --

door.

"Listen, Louise. I hate this life of the fashionable world,
always ordered, measured, ruled, like our music-paper.
What I have always wished for, desired, and coveted, is the
life of an artist, free and independent, relying only on my
own resources, and accountable only to myself. Remain here?
What for? -- that they may try, a month hence, to marry me
again; and to whom? -- M. Debray, perhaps, as it was once
proposed. No, Louise, no! This evening's adventure will
serve for my excuse. I did not seek one, I did not ask for one.
God sends me this, and I hail it joyfully!"

"That we may be discovered."

"How strong and courageous you are!" said the fair, frail girl
to her brunette companion.

"What do you fear?"
"The door is locked."
"They may tell us to open it."
"They may if they like, but we will not."
"You are a perfect Amazon, Eugenie!" And the two young
girls began to heap into a trunk all the things they thought
they should require. "There now," said Eugenie, "while I
change my costume do you lock the portmanteau." Louise
pressed with all the strength of her little hands on the top of
the portmanteau. "But I cannot," said she; "I am not strong
391


CHAPTER 97


THE DEPARTURE FOR BELGIUM

enough; do you shut it."

whom every one might have thought plunged in grief, the
one on her own account, the other from interest in her friend,
"Ah, you do well to ask," said Eugenie, laughing; "I forgot
burst out laughing, as they cleared away every visible trace
that I was Hercules, and you only the pale Omphale!" And
of the disorder which had naturally accompanied the
the young girl, kneeling on the top, pressed the two parts of
preparations for their escape. Then, having blown out the
the portmanteau together, and Mademoiselle d'Armilly
lights, the two fugitives, looking and listening eagerly, with
passed the bolt of the padlock through. When this was done,
outstretched necks, opened the door of a dressing-room
Eugenie opened a drawer, of which she kept the key, and
which led by a side staircase down to the yard, -- Eugenie
took from it a wadded violet silk travelling cloak. "Here,"
going first, and holding with one arm the portmanteau,
said she, "you see I have thought of everything; with this
which by the opposite handle Mademoiselle d'Armilly
cloak you will not be cold."
scarcely raised with both hands. The yard was empty; the
"But you?"
clock was striking twelve. The porter was not yet gone to
"Oh, I am never cold, you know! Besides, with these men's bed. Eugenie approached softly, and saw the old man
sleeping soundly in an arm-chair in his lodge. She returned
clothes" -to Louise, took up the portmanteau, which she had placed
"Will you dress here?"
for a moment on the ground, and they reached the archway
under the shadow of the wall.
"Certainly."
Eugenie concealed Louise in an angle of the gateway, so that
if the porter chanced to awake he might see but one person.
"Do not be uneasy, you little coward! All our servants are
Then placing herself in the full light of the lamp which lit the
busy, discussing the grand affair. Besides, what is there
yard, -- "Gate!" cried she, with her finest contralto voice, and
astonishing, when you think of the grief I ought to be in, that
rapping at the window.
I shut myself up? -- tell me!"
The porter got up as Eugenie expected, and even advanced
"No, truly -- you comfort me."
some steps to recognize the person who was going out, but
"Come and help me."
seeing a young man striking his boot impatiently with his
From the same drawer she took a man's complete costume, riding-whip, he opened it immediately. Louise slid through
from the boots to the coat, and a provision of linen, where the half-open gate like a snake, and bounded lightly forward.
there was nothing superfluous, but every requisite. Then, Eugenie, apparently calm, although in all probability her
with a promptitude which indicated that this was not the heart beat somewhat faster than usual, went out in her turn.
first time she had amused herself by adopting the garb of the A porter was passing and they gave him the portmanteau;
opposite sex, Eugenie drew on the boots and pantaloons, then the two young girls, having told him to take it to No. 36,
tied her cravat, buttoned her waistcoat up to the throat, and Rue de la Victoire, walked behind this man, whose presence
put on a coat which admirably fitted her beautiful figure. comforted Louise. As for Eugenie, she was as strong as a
"Oh, that is very good -- indeed, it is very good!" said Louise, Judith or a Delilah. They arrived at the appointed spot.
looking at her with admiration; "but that beautiful black hair, Eugenie ordered the porter to put down the portmanteau,
those magnificent braids, which made all the ladies sigh with gave him some pieces of money, and having rapped at the
envy, -- will they go under a man's hat like the one I see shutter sent him away. The shutter where Eugenie had
rapped was that of a little laundress, who had been
down there?"
previously warned, and was not yet gone to bed. She opened
"You shall see," said Eugenie. And with her left hand seizing the door.
the thick mass, which her long fingers could scarcely grasp,
she took in her right hand a pair of long scissors, and soon "Mademoiselle," said Eugenie, "let the porter get the
the steel met through the rich and splendid hair, which fell post-chaise from the coach-house, and fetch some
in a cluster at her feet as she leaned back to keep it from her post-horses from the hotel. Here are five francs for his
coat. Then she grasped the front hair, which she also cut off, trouble."
without expressing the least regret; on the contrary, her eyes "Indeed," said Louise, "I admire you, and I could almost say
sparkled with greater pleasure than usual under her ebony respect you." The laundress looked on in astonishment, but
eyebrows. "Oh, the magnificent hair!" said Louise, with as she had been promised twenty louis, she made no remark.
regret.
In a quarter of an hour the porter returned with a post-boy
"And am I not a hundred times better thus?" cried Eugenie, and horses, which were harnessed, and put in the
smoothing the scattered curls of her hair, which had now post-chaise in a minute, while the porter fastened the
quite a masculine appearance; "and do you not think me portmanteau on with the assistance of a cord and strap.
handsomer so?"
"Here is the passport," said the postilion, "which way are we
"Oh, you are beautiful -- always beautiful!" cried Louise. going, young gentleman?"
"Shall you have time?"

"Now, where are you going?"

"To Fontainebleau," replied Eugenie with an almost
"To Brussels, if you like; it is the nearest frontier. We can go masculine voice.
to Brussels, Liege, Aix-la-Chapelle; then up the Rhine to "What do you say?" said Louise.
Strasburg. We will cross Switzerland, and go down into Italy
"I am giving them the slip," said Eugenie; "this woman to
by the Saint-Gothard. Will that do?"
whom we have given twenty louis may betray us for forty;
"Yes."
we will soon alter our direction." And the young girl jumped
into the britzska, which was admirably arranged for sleeping
"What are you looking at?"
in, without scarcely touching the step. "You are always
"I am looking at you; indeed you are adorable like that! One right," said the music teacher, seating herself by the side of
would say you were carrying me off."
her friend.
"And they would be right, pardieu!"
A quarter of an hour afterwards the postilion, having been
"Oh, I think you swore, Eugenie." And the two young girls,
392

put in the right road, passed with a crack of his whip
through the gateway of the Barriere Saint-Martin. "Ah," said

Louise, breathing freely, "here we are out of Paris."
"Yes, my dear, the abduction is an accomplished fact,"
replied Eugenie. "Yes, and without violence," said Louise.

"I shall bring that forward as an extenuating circumstance,"
replied Eugenie. These words were lost in the noise which
the carriage made in rolling over the pavement of La Villette.
M. Danglars no longer had a daughter.

393


CHAPTER 98


Chapter 98

THE BELL AND BOTTLE TAVERN

The Bell And Bottle Tavern

A

nd now let us leave Mademoiselle Danglars and her
friend pursuing their way to Brussels, and return to
poor Andrea Cavalcanti, so inopportunely interrupted in his
rise to fortune. Notwithstanding his youth, Master Andrea
was a very skilful and intelligent boy. We have seen that on
the first rumor which reached the salon he had gradually
approached the door, and crossing two or three rooms at last
disappeared. But we have forgotten to mention one
circumstance, which nevertheless ought not to be omitted; in
one of the rooms he crossed, the trousseau of the bride-elect
was on exhibition. There were caskets of diamonds,
cashmere shawls, Valenciennes lace, English veilings, and in
fact all the tempting things, the bare mention of which
makes the hearts of young girls bound with joy, and which is
called the "corbeille."* Now, in passing through this room,
Andrea proved himself not only to be clever and intelligent,
but also provident, for he helped himself to the most
valuable of the ornaments before him.
* Literally, "the basket," because wedding gifts were
originally brought in such a receptacle.

Furnished with this plunder, Andrea leaped with a lighter
heart from the window, intending to slip through the hands
of the gendarmes. Tall and well proportioned as an ancient
gladiator, and muscular as a Spartan, he walked for a
quarter of an hour without knowing where to direct his steps,
actuated by the sole idea of getting away from the spot
where if he lingered he knew that he would surely be taken.
Having passed through the Rue Mont Blanc, guided by the
instinct which leads thieves always to take the safest path, he
found himself at the end of the Rue Lafayette. There he
stopped, breathless and panting. He was quite alone; on one
side was the vast wilderness of the Saint-Lazare, on the other,
Paris enshrouded in darkness. "Am I to be captured?" he
cried; "no, not if I can use more activity than my enemies.
My safety is now a mere question of speed." At this moment
he saw a cab at the top of the Faubourg Poissonniere. The
dull driver, smoking his pipe, was plodding along toward
the limits of the Faubourg Saint-Denis, where no doubt he
ordinarily had his station. "Ho, friend!" said Benedetto.
"What do you want, sir?" asked the driver.
"Is your horse tired?"
"Tired? oh, yes, tired enough -- he has done nothing the
whole of this blessed day! Four wretched fares, and twenty
sous over, making in all seven francs, are all that I have
earned, and I ought to take ten to the owner."
"Will you add these twenty francs to the seven you have?"
"With pleasure, sir; twenty francs are not to be despised. Tell
me what I am to do for this."
"A very easy thing, if your horse isn't tired."
"I tell you he'll go like the wind, -- only tell me which way to
drive."
"Towards the Louvres."
"Ah, I know the way -- you get good sweetened rum over
there."

waiting, he must have gone on."
"It is likely."
"Well, will you try and overtake him?"
"Nothing I should like better."
"If you do not overtake him before we reach Bourget you
shall have twenty francs; if not before Louvres, thirty."
"And if we do overtake him?"
"Forty," said Andrea, after a moment's hesitation, at the end
of which he remembered that he might safely promise.
"That's all right," said the man; "hop in, and we're off!
Who-o-o-p, la!"
Andrea got into the cab, which passed rapidly through the
Faubourg Saint-Denis, along the Faubourg Saint-Martin,
crossed the barrier, and threaded its way through the
interminable Villette. They never overtook the chimerical
friend, yet Andrea frequently inquired of people on foot
whom he passed and at the inns which were not yet closed,
for a green cabriolet and bay horse; and as there are a great
many cabriolets to be seen on the road to the Low Countries,
and as nine-tenths of them are green, the inquiries increased
at every step. Every one had just seen it pass; it was only five
hundred, two hundred, one hundred steps in advance; at
length they reached it, but it was not the friend. Once the cab
was also passed by a calash rapidly whirled along by two
post-horses. "Ah," said Cavalcanti to himself, "if I only had
that britzska, those two good post-horses, and above all the
passport that carries them on!" And he sighed deeply. The
calash contained Mademoiselle Danglars and Mademoiselle
d'Armilly. "Hurry, hurry!" said Andrea, "we must overtake
him soon." And the poor horse resumed the desperate gallop
it had kept up since leaving the barrier, and arrived
steaming at Louvres.
"Certainly," said Andrea, "I shall not overtake my friend, but
I shall kill your horse, therefore I had better stop. Here are
thirty francs; I will sleep at the Red Horse, and will secure a
place in the first coach. Good-night, friend." And Andrea,
after placing six pieces of five francs each in the man's hand,
leaped lightly on to the pathway. The cabman joyfully
pocketed the sum, and turned back on his road to Paris.
Andrea pretended to go towards the Red Horse inn, but
after leaning an instant against the door, and hearing the last
sound of the cab, which was disappearing from view, he
went on his road, and with a lusty stride soon traversed the
space of two leagues. Then he rested; he must be near
Chapelle-en-Serval, where he pretended to be going. It was
not fatigue that stayed Andrea here; it was that he might
form some resolution, adopt some plan. It would be
impossible to make use of a diligence, equally so to engage
post-horses; to travel either way a passport was necessary. It
was still more impossible to remain in the department of the
Oise, one of the most open and strictly guarded in France;
this was quite out of the question, especially to a man like
Andrea, perfectly conversant with criminal matters.

He sat down by the side of the moat, buried his face in his
hands and reflected. Ten minutes after he raised his head; his
"Exactly so; I merely wish to overtake one of my friends, resolution was made. He threw some dust over the topcoat,
with whom I am going to hunt to-morrow at which he had found time to unhook from the ante-chamber
Chapelle-en-Serval. He should have waited for me here with and button over his ball costume, and going to
a cabriolet till half-past eleven; it is twelve, and, tired of Chapelle-en-Serval he knocked loudly at the door of the only
394

inn in the place. The host opened. "My friend," said Andrea,
"I was coming from Montefontaine to Senlis, when my horse,
which is a troublesome creature, stumbled and threw me. I
must reach Compiegne to-night, or I shall cause deep anxiety
to my family. Could you let me hire a horse of you?"

himself the dress of a woodcutter and a hatchet, casting off
the lion's skin to assume that of the woodman; then, with his
hands covered with dirt, his hair darkened by means of a
leaden comb, his complexion embrowned with a preparation
for which one of his old comrades had given him the recipe,
he intended, by following the wooded districts, to reach the
An inn-keeper has always a horse to let, whether it be good
nearest frontier, walking by night and sleeping in the day in
or bad. The host called the stable-boy, and ordered him to
the forests and quarries, and only entering inhabited regions
saddle "Whitey," then he awoke his son, a child of seven
to buy a loaf from time to time.
years, whom he ordered to ride before the gentleman and
bring back the horse. Andrea gave the inn-keeper twenty Once past the frontier, Andrea proposed making money of
francs, and in taking them from his pocket dropped a his diamonds; and by uniting the proceeds to ten bank-notes
visiting card. This belonged to one of his friends at the Cafe he always carried about with him in case of accident, he
de Paris, so that the innkeeper, picking it up after Andrea would then find himself possessor of about 50,000 livres,
had left, was convinced that he had let his horse to the Count which he philosophically considered as no very deplorable
of Mauleon, 25 Rue Saint-Dominique, that being the name condition after all. Moreover, he reckoned much on the
and address on the card. "Whitey" was not a fast animal, but interest of the Danglars to hush up the rumor of their own
he kept up an easy, steady pace; in three hours and a half misadventures. These were the reasons which, added to the
Andrea had traversed the nine leagues which separated him fatigue, caused Andrea to sleep so soundly. In order that he
from Compiegne, and four o'clock struck as he reached the might awaken early he did not close the shutters, but
place where the coaches stop. There is an excellent tavern at contented himself with bolting the door and placing on the
Compiegne, well remembered by those who have ever been table an unclasped and long-pointed knife, whose temper he
there. Andrea, who had often stayed there in his rides about well knew, and which was never absent from him. About
Paris, recollected the Bell and Bottle inn; he turned around, seven in the morning Andrea was awakened by a ray of
saw the sign by the light of a reflected lamp, and having sunlight, which played, warm and brilliant, upon his face. In
dismissed the child, giving him all the small coin he had all well-organized brains, the predominating idea -- and
about him, he began knocking at the door, very reasonably there always is one -- is sure to be the last thought before
concluding that having now three or four hours before him sleeping, and the first upon waking in the morning. Andrea
he had best fortify himself against the fatigues of the morrow had scarcely opened his eyes when his predominating idea
by a sound sleep and a good supper. A waiter opened the presented itself, and whispered in his ear that he had slept
door.
too long. He jumped out of bed and ran to the window. A
gendarme was crossing the court. A gendarme is one of the
"My friend," said Andrea, "I have been dining at
most striking objects in the world, even to a man void of
Saint-Jean-au-Bois, and expected to catch the coach which
uneasiness; but for one who has a timid conscience, and with
passes by at midnight, but like a fool I have lost my way, and
good cause too, the yellow, blue, and white uniform is really
have been walking for the last four hours in the forest. Show
very alarming.
me into one of those pretty little rooms which overlook the
court, and bring me a cold fowl and a bottle of Bordeaux." "Why is that gendarme there?" asked Andrea of himself.
The waiter had no suspicions; Andrea spoke with perfect Then, all at once, he replied, with that logic which the reader
composure, he had a cigar in his mouth, and his hands in the has, doubtless, remarked in him, "There is nothing
pocket of his top coat; his clothes were fashionably made, his astonishing in seeing a gendarme at an inn; instead of being
chin smooth, his boots irreproachable; he looked merely as if astonished, let me dress myself." And the youth dressed
he had stayed out very late, that was all. While the waiter himself with a facility his valet de chambre had failed to rob
was preparing his room, the hostess arose; Andrea assumed him of during the two months of fashionable life he had led
his most charming smile, and asked if he could have No. 3, in Paris. "Now then," said Andrea, while dressing himself,
which he had occupied on his last stay at Compiegne. "I'll wait till he leaves, and then I'll slip away." And, saying
Unfortunately, No. 3 was engaged by a young man who was this, Andrea, who had now put on his boots and cravat, stole
travelling with his sister. Andrea appeared in despair, but gently to the window, and a second time lifted up the muslin
consoled himself when the hostess assured him that No. 7, curtain. Not only was the first gendarme still there, but the
prepared for him, was situated precisely the same as No. 3, young man now perceived a second yellow, blue, and white
and while warming his feet and chatting about the last races uniform at the foot of the staircase, the only one by which he
at Chantilly, he waited until they announced his room to be could descend, while a third, on horseback, holding a
ready.
musket in his fist, was posted as a sentinel at the great street
door which alone afforded the means of egress.
Andrea had not spoken without cause of the pretty rooms
looking out upon the court of the Bell Tavern, which with its The appearance of the third gendarme settled the matter, for
triple galleries like those of a theatre, with the jessamine and a crowd of curious loungers was extended before him,
clematis twining round the light columns, forms one of the effectually blocking the entrance to the hotel. "They're after
prettiest entrances to an inn that you can imagine. The fowl me!" was Andrea's first thought. "The devil!" A pallor
was tender, the wine old, the fire clear and sparkling, and overspread the young man's forehead, and he looked around
Andrea was surprised to find himself eating with as good an him with anxiety. His room, like all those on the same floor,
appetite as though nothing had happened. Then be went to had but one outlet to the gallery in the sight of everybody. "I
bed and almost immediately fell into that deep sleep which am lost!" was his second thought; and, indeed, for a man in
is sure to visit men of twenty years of age, even when they Andrea's situation, an arrest meant the assizes, trial, and
are torn with remorse. Now, here we are obliged to own that death, -- death without mercy or delay. For a moment he
Andrea ought to have felt remorse, but that he did not. This convulsively pressed his head within his hands, and during
was the plan which had appealed to him to afford the best that brief period he became nearly mad with terror; but soon
chance of his security. Before daybreak he would awake, a ray of hope glimmered in the multitude of thoughts which
leave the inn after rigorously paying his bill, and reaching bewildered his mind, and a faint smile played upon his
the forest, he would, under presence of making studies in white lips and pallid cheeks. He looked around and saw the
painting, test the hospitality of some peasants, procure objects of his search upon the chimney-piece; they were a
395


CHAPTER 98


THE BELL AND BOTTLE TAVERN

pen, ink, and paper. With forced composure he dipped the
pen in the ink, and wrote the following lines upon a sheet of
paper: --

retiring, as might have been reasonably expected upon this
announcement, were watching with increased attention.

It was now his turn to look about him; the Hotel de Ville, a
massive sixteenth century building, was on his right; any
one could descend from the openings in the tower, and
examine every corner of the roof below, and Andrea
expected momentarily to see the head of a gendarme appear
at one of these openings. If once discovered, he knew he
He then drew the pin from his cravat and placed it on the
would be lost, for the roof afforded no chance of escape; he
paper. This done, instead of leaving the door fastened, he
therefore resolved to descend, not through the same
drew back the bolts and even placed the door ajar, as though
chimney by which he had come up, but by a similar one
he had left the room, forgetting to close it, and slipping into
conducting to another room. He looked around for a
the chimney like a man accustomed to that kind of
chimney from which no smoke issued, and having reached it,
gymnastic exercise, having effaced the marks of his feet
he disappeared through the orifice without being seen by
upon the floor, he commenced climbing the only opening
any one. At the same minute, one of the little windows of the
which afforded him the means of escape. At this precise time,
Hotel de Ville was thrown open, and the head of a gendarme
the first gendarme Andrea had noticed walked up-stairs,
appeared. For an instant it remained motionless as one of the
preceded by the commissary of police, and supported by the
stone decorations of the building, then after a long sigh of
second gendarme who guarded the staircase and was
disappointment the head disappeared. The brigadier, calm
himself re-enforced by the one stationed at the door.
and dignified as the law he represented, passed through the
Andrea was indebted for this visit to the following crowd, without answering the thousand questions
circumstances. At daybreak, the telegraphs were set at work addressed to him, and re-entered the hotel.
in all directions, and almost immediately the authorities in
"Well?" asked the two gendarmes.
every district had exerted their utmost endeavors to arrest
the murderer of Caderousse. Compiegne, that royal "Well, my boys," said the brigadier, "the brigand must really
residence and fortified town, is well furnished with have escaped early this morning; but we will send to the
authorities, gendarmes, and commissaries of police; they Villers-Coterets and Noyon roads, and search the forest,
therefore began operations as soon as the telegraphic when we shall catch him, no doubt." The honorable
despatch arrived, and the Bell and Bottle being the functionary had scarcely expressed himself thus, in that
best-known hotel in the town, they had naturally directed intonation which is peculiar to brigadiers of the gendarmerie,
their first inquiries there.
when a loud scream, accompanied by the violent ringing of a
bell, resounded through the court of the hotel. "Ah, what is
Now, besides the reports of the sentinels guarding the Hotel
that?" cried the brigadier.
de Ville, which is next door to the Bell and Bottle, it had been
stated by others that a number of travellers had arrived "Some traveller seems impatient," said the host. "What
during the night. The sentinel who was relieved at six o'clock number was it that rang?"
in the morning, remembered perfectly that just as he was
"Number 3."
taking his post a few minutes past four a young man arrived
on horseback, with a little boy before him. The young man, "Run, waiter!" At this moment the screams and ringing were
having dismissed the boy and horse, knocked at the door of redoubled. "Ah," said the brigadier, stopping the servant,
the hotel, which was opened, and again closed after his "the person who is ringing appears to want something more
entrance. This late arrival had attracted much suspicion, and than a waiter; we will attend upon him with a gendarme.
the young man being no other than Andrea, the commissary Who occupies Number 3?"
and gendarme, who was a brigadier, directed their steps
towards his room.
"The little fellow who arrived last night in a post-chaise with
They found the door ajar. "Oh, ho," said the brigadier, who his sister, and who asked for an apartment with two beds."
thoroughly understood the trick; "a bad sign to find the door The bell here rang for the third time, with another shriek of
open! I would rather find it triply bolted." And, indeed, the anguish.
little note and pin upon the table confirmed, or rather
corroborated, the sad truth. Andrea had fled. We say "Follow me, Mr. Commissary!" said the brigadier; "tread in
corroborated, because the brigadier was too experienced to my steps."
be convinced by a single proof. He glanced around, looked "Wait an instant," said the host; "Number 3 has two
in the bed, shook the curtains, opened the closets, and finally staircases, -- inside and outside."
stopped at the chimney. Andrea had taken the precaution to
"Good," said the brigadier. "I will take charge of the inside
leave no traces of his feet in the ashes, but still it was an
one. Are the carbines loaded?"
outlet, and in this light was not to be passed over without
"Yes, brigadier."
serious investigation.
"I have no money to pay my bill, but I am not a dishonest
man; I leave behind me as a pledge this pin, worth ten times
the amount. I shall be excused for leaving at daybreak, for I
was ashamed."

The brigadier sent for some sticks and straw, and having
filled the chimney with them, set a light to it. The fire
crackled, and the smoke ascended like the dull vapor from a
volcano; but still no prisoner fell down, as they expected.
The fact was, that Andrea, at war with society ever since his
youth, was quite as deep as a gendarme, even though he
were advanced to the rank of brigadier, and quite prepared
for the fire, he had climbed out on the roof and was
crouching down against the chimney-pots. At one time he
thought he was saved, for he heard the brigadier exclaim in a
loud voice, to the two gendarmes, "He is not here!" But
venturing to peep, he perceived that the latter, instead of
396

"Well, you guard the exterior, and if he attempts to fly, fire
upon him; he must be a great criminal, from what the
telegraph says."
The brigadier, followed by the commissary, disappeared by
the inside staircase, accompanied by the noise which his
assertions respecting Andrea had excited in the crowd. This
is what had happened. Andrea had very cleverly managed
to descend two-thirds of the chimney, but then his foot
slipped, and notwithstanding his endeavors, he came into
the room with more speed and noise than he intended. It
would have signified little had the room been empty, but
unfortunately it was occupied. Two ladies, sleeping in one

bed, were awakened by the noise, and fixing their eyes upon
the spot whence the sound proceeded, they saw a man. One
of these ladies, the fair one, uttered those terrible shrieks
which resounded through the house, while the other,
rushing to the bell-rope, rang with all her strength. Andrea,
as we can see, was surrounded by misfortune.
"For pity's sake," he cried, pale and bewildered, without
seeing whom he was addressing, -- "for pity's sake do not
call assistance! Save me! -- I will not harm you."
"Andrea, the murderer!" cried one of the ladies.
"Eugenie! Mademoiselle Danglars!" exclaimed Andrea,
stupefied.
"Help, help!" cried Mademoiselle d'Armilly, taking the bell
from her companion's hand, and ringing it yet more
violently. "Save me, I am pursued!" said Andrea, clasping his
hands. "For pity, for mercy's sake do not deliver me up!"
"It is too late, they are coming," said Eugenie.
"Well, conceal me somewhere; you can say you were
needlessly alarmed; you can turn their suspicions and save
my life!"
The two ladies, pressing closely to one another, and drawing
the bedclothes tightly around them, remained silent to this
supplicating voice, repugnance and fear taking possession of
their minds.
"Well, be it so," at length said Eugenie; "return by the same
road you came, and we will say nothing about you, unhappy
wretch."
"Here he is, here he is!" cried a voice from the landing; "here
he is! I see him!" The brigadier had put his eye to the keyhole,
and had discovered Andrea in a posture of entreaty. A
violent blow from the butt end of the musket burst open the
lock, two more forced out the bolts, and the broken door fell
in. Andrea ran to the other door, leading to the gallery,
ready to rush out; but he was stopped short, and he stood
with his body a little thrown back, pale, and with the useless
knife in his clinched hand.
"Fly, then!" cried Mademoiselle d'Armilly, whose pity

returned as her fears diminished; "fly!"
"Or kill yourself!" said Eugenie (in a tone which a Vestal in
the amphitheatre would have used, when urging the
victorious gladiator to finish his vanquished adversary).
Andrea shuddered, and looked on the young girl with an
expression which proved how little he understood such
ferocious honor. "Kill myself?" he cried, throwing down his
knife; "why should I do so?"
"Why, you said," answered Mademoiselle Danglars, "that
you would be condemned to die like the worst criminals."
"Bah," said Cavalcanti, crossing his arms, "one has friends."
The brigadier advanced to him, sword in hand. "Come,
come," said Andrea, "sheathe your sword, my fine fellow;
there is no occasion to make such a fuss, since I give myself
up;" and he held out his hands to be manacled. The girls
looked with horror upon this shameful metamorphosis, the
man of the world shaking off his covering and appearing as
a galley-slave. Andrea turned towards them, and with an
impertinent smile asked, -- "Have you any message for your
father, Mademoiselle Danglars, for in all probability I shall
return to Paris?"
Eugenie covered her face with her hands. "Oh, ho!" said
Andrea, "you need not be ashamed, even though you did
post after me. Was I not nearly your husband?"
And with this raillery Andrea went out, leaving the two girls
a prey to their own feelings of shame, and to the comments
of the crowd. An hour after they stepped into their calash,
both dressed in feminine attire. The gate of the hotel had
been closed to screen them from sight, but they were forced,
when the door was open, to pass through a throng of curious
glances and whispering voices. Eugenie closed her eyes; but
though she could not see, she could hear, and the sneers of
the crowd reached her in the carriage. "Oh, why is not the
world a wilderness?" she exclaimed, throwing herself into
the arms of Mademoiselle d'Armilly, her eyes sparkling with
the same kind of rage which made Nero wish that the
Roman world had but one neck, that he might sever it at a
single blow. The next day they stopped at the Hotel de
Flandre, at Brussels. The same evening Andrea was
incarcerated in the Conciergerie.

397


CHAPTER 99


Chapter 99

W

e have seen how quietly Mademoiselle Danglars and
Mademoiselle
d'Armilly
accomplished
their
transformation and flight; the fact being that every one was
too much occupied in his or her own affairs to think of theirs.
We will leave the banker contemplating the enormous
magnitude of his debt before the phantom of bankruptcy,
and follow the baroness, who after being momentarily
crushed under the weight of the blow which had struck her,
had gone to seek her usual adviser, Lucien Debray. The
baroness had looked forward to this marriage as a means of
ridding her of a guardianship which, over a girl of Eugenie's
character, could not fail to be rather a troublesome
undertaking; for in the tacit relations which maintain the
bond of family union, the mother, to maintain her
ascendancy over her daughter, must never fail to be a model
of wisdom and a type of perfection.
Now, Madame Danglars feared Eugenie's sagacity and the
influence of Mademoiselle d'Armilly; she had frequently
observed the contemptuous expression with which her
daughter looked upon Debray, -- an expression which
seemed to imply that she understood all her mother's
amorous and pecuniary relationships with the intimate
secretary; moreover, she saw that Eugenie detested Debray,
-- not only because he was a source of dissension and
scandal under the paternal roof, but because she had at once
classed him in that catalogue of bipeds whom Plato
endeavors to withdraw from the appellation of men, and
whom Diogenes designated as animals upon two legs
without feathers.
Unfortunately, in this world of ours, each person views
things through a certain medium, and so is prevented from
seeing in the same light as others, and Madame Danglars,
therefore, very much regretted that the marriage of Eugenie
had not taken place, not only because the match was good,
and likely to insure the happiness of her child, but because it
would also set her at liberty. She ran therefore to Debray,
who, after having like the rest of Paris witnessed the contract
scene and the scandal attending it, had retired in haste to his
club, where he was chatting with some friends upon the
events which served as a subject of conversation for
three-fourths of that city known as the capital of the world.

THE LAW

The Law
arranged and watered with so much care that his absence
was half excused in the eyes of the poor woman.
At twenty minutes of twelve, Madame Danglars, tired of
waiting, returned home. Women of a certain grade are like
prosperous grisettes in one respect, they seldom return home
after twelve o'clock. The baroness returned to the hotel with
as much caution as Eugenie used in leaving it; she ran lightly
up-stairs, and with an aching heart entered her apartment,
contiguous, as we know, to that of Eugenie. She was fearful
of exciting any remark, and believed firmly in her daughter's
innocence and fidelity to the paternal roof. She listened at
Eugenie's door, and hearing no sound tried to enter, but the
bolts were in place. Madame Danglars then concluded that
the young girl had been overcome with the terrible
excitement of the evening, and had gone to bed and to sleep.
She called the maid and questioned her.
"Mademoiselle Eugenie," said the maid, "retired to her
apartment with Mademoiselle d'Armilly; they then took tea
together, after which they desired me to leave, saying that
they needed me no longer." Since then the maid had been
below, and like every one else she thought the young ladies
were in their own room; Madame Danglars, therefore, went
to bed without a shadow of suspicion, and began to muse
over the recent events. In proportion as her memory became
clearer, the occurrences of the evening were revealed in their
true light; what she had taken for confusion was a tumult;
what she had regarded as something distressing, was in
reality a disgrace. And then the baroness remembered that
she had felt no pity for poor Mercedes, who had been
afflicted with as severe a blow through her husband and son.

"Eugenie," she said to herself, "is lost, and so are we. The
affair, as it will be reported, will cover us with shame; for in
a society such as ours satire inflicts a painful and incurable
wound. How fortunate that Eugenie is possessed of that
strange character which has so often made me tremble!" And
her glance was turned towards heaven, where a mysterious
providence disposes all things, and out of a fault, nay, even a
vice, sometimes produces a blessing. And then her thoughts,
cleaving through space like a bird in the air, rested on
Cavalcanti. This Andrea was a wretch, a robber, an assassin,
and yet his manners showed the effects of a sort of education,
At the precise time when Madame Danglars, dressed in if not a complete one; he had been presented to the world
black and concealed in a long veil, was ascending the stairs with the appearance of an immense fortune, supported by an
leading to Debray's apartments, -- notwithstanding the honorable name. How could she extricate herself from this
assurances of the concierge that the young man was not at labyrinth? To whom would she apply to help her out of this
home, -- Debray was occupied in repelling the insinuations painful situation? Debray, to whom she had run, with the
of a friend, who tried to persuade him that after the terrible first instinct of a woman towards the man she loves, and
scene which had just taken place he ought, as a friend of the who yet betrays her, -- Debray could but give her advice, she
family, to marry Mademoiselle Danglars and her two must apply to some one more powerful than he.
millions. Debray did not defend himself very warmly, for
The baroness then thought of M. de Villefort. It was M. de
the idea had sometimes crossed his mind; still, when he
Villefort who had remorselessly brought misfortune into her
recollected the independent, proud spirit of Eugenie, he
family, as though they had been strangers. But, no; on
positively rejected it as utterly impossible, though the same
reflection, the procureur was not a merciless man; and it was
thought again continually recurred and found a
not the magistrate, slave to his duties, but the friend, the
resting-place in his heart. Tea, play, and the conversation,
loyal friend, who roughly but firmly cut into the very core of
which had become interesting during the discussion of such
the corruption; it was not the executioner, but the surgeon,
serious affairs, lasted till one o'clock in the morning.
who wished to withdraw the honor of Danglars from
Meanwhile Madame Danglars, veiled and uneasy, awaited ignominious association with the disgraced young man they
the return of Debray in the little green room, seated between had presented to the world as their son-in-law. And since
two baskets of flowers, which she had that morning sent, Villefort, the friend of Danglars, had acted in this way, no
and which, it must be confessed, Debray had himself one could suppose that he had been previously acquainted
398

with, or had lent himself to, any of Andrea's intrigues.
Villefort's conduct, therefore, upon reflection, appeared to
the baroness as if shaped for their mutual advantage. But the
inflexibility of the procureur should stop there; she would
see him the next day, and if she could not make him fail in
his duties as a magistrate, she would, at least, obtain all the
indulgence he could allow. She would invoke the past, recall
old recollections; she would supplicate him by the
remembrance of guilty, yet happy days. M. de Villefort
would stifle the affair; he had only to turn his eyes on one
side, and allow Andrea to fly, and follow up the crime under
that shadow of guilt called contempt of court. And after this
reasoning she slept easily.

and blew it. The valet de chambre appeared on the
door-steps. "You will excuse this poor fellow, madame," he
said, as he preceded the baroness, "but his orders are precise,
and M. de Villefort begged me to tell you that he could not
act otherwise."

"Do you intend opening the door?" said the baroness.

"Alas, madame," said the procureur with his imperturbable
calmness of manner, "I consider those alone misfortunes
which are irreparable."

In the court showing his merchandise, was a tradesman who
had been admitted with the same precautions. The baroness
ascended the steps; she felt herself strongly infected with the
sadness which seemed to magnify her own, and still guided
by the valet de chambre, who never lost sight of her for an
instant, she was introduced to the magistrate's study.
Preoccupied as Madame Danglars had been with the object
of her visit, the treatment she had received from these
At nine o'clock next morning she arose, and without ringing underlings appeared to her so insulting, that she began by
for her maid or giving the least sign of her activity, she complaining of it. But Villefort, raising his head, bowed
dressed herself in the same simple style as on the previous down by grief, looked up at her with so sad a smile that her
night; then running down-stairs, she left the hotel. walked to complaints died upon her lips. "Forgive my servants," he
the Rue de Provence, called a cab, and drove to M. de said, "for a terror I cannot blame them for; from being
Villefort's house. For the last month this wretched house had suspected they have become suspicious."
presented the gloomy appearance of a lazaretto infected with
Madame Danglars had often heard of the terror to which the
the plague. Some of the apartments were closed within and
magistrate alluded, but without the evidence of her own
without; the shutters were only opened to admit a minute's
eyesight she could never have believed that the sentiment
air, showing the scared face of a footman, and immediately
had been carried so far. "You too, then, are unhappy?" she
afterwards the window would be closed, like a gravestone
said. "Yes, madame," replied the magistrate.
falling on a sepulchre, and the neighbors would say to each
other in a low voice, "Will there be another funeral to-day at "Then you pity me!"
the procureur's house?" Madame Danglars involuntarily "Sincerely, madame."
shuddered at the desolate aspect of the mansion; descending
from the cab, she approached the door with trembling knees, "And you understand what brings me here?"
and rang the bell. Three times did the bell ring with a dull, "You wish to speak to me about the circumstance which has
heavy sound, seeming to participate, in the general sadness, just happened?"
before the concierge appeared and peeped through the door,
"Yes, sir, -- a fearful misfortune."
which he opened just wide enough to allow his words to be
heard. He saw a lady, a fashionable, elegantly dressed lady, "You mean a mischance."
and yet the door remained almost closed.
"A mischance?" repeated the baroness.
"First, madame, who are you?"
"Who am I? You know me well enough."
"We no longer know any one, madame."
"You must be mad, my friend," said the baroness.
"Where do you come from?"
"Oh, this is too much!"

"And do you suppose this will be forgotten?"
"Everything will be forgotten, madame," said Villefort. "Your
daughter will be married to-morrow, if not to-day -- in a
week, if not to-morrow; and I do not think you can regret the
intended husband of your daughter."

Madame Danglars gazed on Villefort, stupefied to find him
so almost insultingly calm. "Am I come to a friend?" she
"The baroness Danglars; you have seen me twenty times."
asked in a tone full of mournful dignity. "You know that you
are, madame," said Villefort, whose pale cheeks became
"Possibly, madame. And now, what do you want?"
slightly flushed as he gave her the assurance. And truly this
"Oh, how extraordinary! I shall complain to M. de Villefort
assurance carried him back to different events from those
of the impertinence of his servants."
now occupying the baroness and him. "Well, then, be more
"Madame, this is precaution, not impertinence; no one enters affectionate, my dear Villefort," said the baroness. "Speak to
here without an order from M. d'Avrigny, or without me not as a magistrate, but as a friend; and when I am in
speaking to the procureur."
bitter anguish of spirit, do not tell me that I ought to be gay."
Villefort bowed. "When I hear misfortunes named,
"Well, I have business with the procureur."
madame," he said, "I have within the last few mouths
"Is it pressing business?"
contracted the bad habit of thinking of my own, and then I
"You can imagine so, since I have not even brought my cannot help drawing up an egotistical parallel in my mind.
carriage out yet. But enough of this -- here is my card, take it That is the reason that by the side of my misfortunes yours
appear to me mere mischances; that is why my dreadful
to your master."
position makes yours appear enviable. But this annoys you;
"Madame will await my return?"
let us change the subject. You were saying, madame" -"Yes; go." The concierge closed the door, leaving Madame "I came to ask you, my friend," said the baroness, "what will
Danglars in the street. She had not long to wait; directly be done with this impostor?"
afterwards the door was opened wide enough to admit her,
and when she had passed through, it was again shut. "Impostor," repeated Villefort; "certainly, madame, you
Without losing sight of her for an instant, the concierge took appear to extenuate some cases, and exaggerate others.
a whistle from his pocket as soon as they entered the court, Impostor, indeed! -- M. Andrea Cavalcanti, or rather M.
"Madame, these are my orders; excuse me. Your name?"

399


CHAPTER 99


THE LAW

Benedetto, is nothing more nor less than an assassin!"

grief? Has the law ears to be melted by your sweet voice?
Has the law a memory for all those soft recollections you
"Sir, I do not deny the justice of your correction, but the more
endeavor to recall? No, madame; the law has commanded,
severely you arm yourself against that unfortunate man, the
and when it commands it strikes. You will tell me that I am a
more deeply will you strike our family. Come, forget him for
living being, and not a code -- a man, and not a volume.
a moment, and instead of pursuing him let him go."
Look at me, madame -- look around me. Have mankind
"You are too late, madame; the orders are issued."
treated me as a brother? Have they loved me? Have they
"Well, should he be arrested -- do they think they will arrest spared me? Has any one shown the mercy towards me that
you now ask at my hands? No, madame, they struck me,
him?"
always struck me!
"I hope so."
"Woman, siren that you are, do you persist in fixing on me
"If they should arrest him (I know that sometimes prisoners that fascinating eye, which reminds me that I ought to blush?
afford means of escape), will you leave him in prison?" -- Well, be it so; let me blush for the faults you know, and
The procureur shook his head. "At least keep him there till perhaps -- perhaps for even more than those! But having
my daughter be married."
sinned myself, -- it may be more deeply than others, -- I
never rest till I have torn the disguises from my
"Impossible, madame; justice has its formalities."
fellow-creatures, and found out their weaknesses. I have
"What, even for me?" said the baroness, half jesting, half in
always found them; and more, -- I repeat it with joy, with
earnest. "For all, even for myself among the rest," replied
triumph, -- I have always found some proof of human
Villefort.
perversity or error. Every criminal I condemn seems to me
"Ah," exclaimed the baroness, without expressing the ideas living evidence that I am not a hideous exception to the rest.
which the exclamation betrayed. Villefort looked at her with Alas, alas, alas; all the world is wicked; let us therefore strike
that piercing glance which reads the secrets of the heart. "Yes, at wickedness!"
I know what you mean," he said; "you refer to the terrible
Villefort pronounced these last words with a feverish rage,
rumors spread abroad in the world, that the deaths which
which gave a ferocious eloquence to his words.
have kept me in mourning for the last three months, and
from which Valentine has only escaped by a miracle, have "But"' said Madame Danglars, resolving to make a last effort,
"this young man, though a murderer, is an orphan,
not happened by natural means."
abandoned by everybody."
"I was not thinking of that," replied Madame Danglars
quickly. "Yes, you were thinking of it, and with justice. You "So much the worse, or rather, so much the better; it has been
could not help thinking of it, and saying to yourself, `you, so ordained that he may have none to weep his fate."
who pursue crime so vindictively, answer now, why are "But this is trampling on the weak, sir."
there unpunished crimes in your dwelling?'" The baroness
"The weakness of a murderer!"
became pale. "You were saying this, were you not?"
"His dishonor reflects upon us."
"Well, I own it."
"I will answer you."

"Is not death in my house?"

Villefort drew his armchair nearer to Madame Danglars;
then resting both hands upon his desk he said in a voice
more hollow than usual: "There are crimes which remain
unpunished because the criminals are unknown, and we
might strike the innocent instead of the guilty; but when the
culprits are discovered" (Villefort here extended his hand
toward a large crucifix placed opposite to his desk) -- "when
they are discovered, I swear to you, by all I hold most sacred,
that whoever they may be they shall die. Now, after the oath
I have just taken, and which I will keep, madame, dare you
ask for mercy for that wretch!"

"Oh, sir," exclaimed the baroness, "you are without pity for
others, well, then, I tell you they will have no mercy on you!"

"But, sir, are you sure he is as guilty as they say?"
"Listen; this is his description: `Benedetto, condemned, at the
age of sixteen, for five years to the galleys for forgery.' He
promised well, as you see -- first a runaway, then an
assassin."
"And who is this wretch?"

"Be it so!" said Villefort, raising his arms to heaven.
"At least, delay the trial till the next assizes; we shall then
have six months before us."
"No, madame," said Villefort; "instructions have been given,
There are yet five days left; five days are more than I require.
Do you not think that I also long for forgetfulness? While
working night and day, I sometimes lose all recollection of
the past, and then I experience the same sort of happiness I
can imagine the dead feel; still, it is better than suffering."
"But, sir, he has fled; let him escape -- inaction is a
pardonable offence."
"I tell you it is too late; early this morning the telegraph was
employed, and at this very minute" --

"Sir," said the valet de chambre, entering the room, "a
dragoon has brought this despatch from the minister of the
"Who can tell? -- a vagabond, a Corsican."
interior." Villefort seized the letter, and hastily broke the seal.
"Has no one owned him?"
Madame Danglars trembled with fear; Villefort started with
joy. "Arrested!" he exclaimed; "he was taken at Compiegne,
"No one; his parents are unknown."
and all is over." Madame Danglars rose from her seat, pale
"But who was the man who brought him from Lucca?"
and cold. "Adieu, sir," she said. "Adieu, madame," replied
"Another rascal like himself, perhaps his accomplice." The the king's attorney, as in an almost joyful manner he
baroness clasped her hands. "Villefort," she exclaimed in her conducted her to the door. Then, turning to his desk, he said,
striking the letter with the back of his right hand, "Come, I
softest and most captivating manner.
had a forgery, three robberies, and two cases of arson, I only
"For heaven's sake, madame," said Villefort, with a firmness
wanted a murder, and here it is. It will be a splendid
of expression not altogether free from harshness -- "for
session!"
heaven's sake, do not ask pardon of me for a guilty wretch!
What am I? -- the law. Has the law any eyes to witness your
400


Chapter 100 The Apparition

A

s the procureur had told Madame Danglars, Valentine
was not yet recovered. Bowed down with fatigue, she
was indeed confined to her bed; and it was in her own room,
and from the lips of Madame de Villefort, that she heard all
the strange events we have related, -- we mean the flight of
Eugenie and the arrest of Andrea Cavalcanti, or rather
Benedetto, together with the accusation of murder
pronounced against him. But Valentine was so weak that
this recital scarcely produced the same effect it would have
done had she been in her usual state of health. Indeed, her
brain was only the seat of vague ideas, and confused forms,
mingled with strange fancies, alone presented themselves
before her eyes.

During the daytime Valentine's perceptions remained
tolerably clear, owing to the constant presence of M. Noirtier,
who caused himself to be carried to his granddaughter's
room, and watched her with his paternal tenderness;
Villefort also, on his return from the law courts, frequently
passed an hour or two with his father and child. At six
o'clock Villefort retired to his study, at eight M. d'Avrigny
himself arrived, bringing the night draught prepared for the
young girl, and then M. Noirtier was carried away. A nurse
of the doctor's choice succeeded them, and never left till
about ten or eleven o'clock, when Valentine was asleep. As
she went down-stairs she gave the keys of Valentine's room
to M. de Villefort, so that no one could reach the sick-room
excepting through that of Madame de Villefort and little
Edward.
Every morning Morrel called on Noirtier to receive news of
Valentine, and, extraordinary as it seemed, each day found
him less uneasy. Certainly, though Valentine still labored
under dreadful nervous excitement, she was better; and
moreover, Monte Cristo had told him when, half distracted,
he had rushed to the count's house, that if she were not dead
in two hours she would be saved. Now four days had
elapsed, and Valentine still lived.
The nervous excitement of which we speak pursued
Valentine even in her sleep, or rather in that state of
somnolence which succeeded her waking hours; it was then,
in the silence of night, in the dim light shed from the
alabaster lamp on the chimney-piece, that she saw the
shadows pass and repass which hover over the bed of
sickness, and fan the fever with their trembling wings. First
she fancied she saw her stepmother threatening her, then
Morrel stretched his arms towards her; sometimes mere
strangers, like the Count of Monte Cristo came to visit her;
even the very furniture, in these moments of delirium,
seemed to move, and this state lasted till about three o'clock
in the morning, when a deep, heavy slumber overcame the
young girl, from which she did not awake till daylight. On
the evening of the day on which Valentine had learned of the
flight of Eugenie and the arrest of Benedetto, -- Villefort
having retired as well as Noirtier and d'Avrigny, -- her
thoughts wandered in a confused maze, alternately
reviewing her own situation and the events she had just
heard.
Eleven o'clock had struck. The nurse, having placed the
beverage prepared by the doctor within reach of the patient,
and locked the door, was listening with terror to the
comments of the servants in the kitchen, and storing her
memory with all the horrible stories which had for some

months past amused the occupants of the ante-chambers in
the house of the king's attorney. Meanwhile an unexpected
scene was passing in the room which had been so carefully
locked. Ten minutes had elapsed since the nurse had left;
Valentine, who for the last hour had been suffering from the
fever which returned nightly, incapable of controlling her
ideas, was forced to yield to the excitement which exhausted
itself in producing and reproducing a succession and
recurrence of the same fancies and images. The night-lamp
threw out countless rays, each resolving itself into some
strange form to her disordered imagination, when suddenly
by its flickering light Valentine thought she saw the door of
her library, which was in the recess by the chimney-piece,
open slowly, though she in vain listened for the sound of the
hinges on which it turned.
At any other time Valentine would have seized the silken
bell-pull and summoned assistance, but nothing astonished
her in her present situation. Her reason told her that all the
visions she beheld were but the children of her imagination,
and the conviction was strengthened by the fact that in the
morning no traces remained of the nocturnal phantoms, who
disappeared with the coming of daylight. From behind the
door a human figure appeared, but the girl was too familiar
with such apparitions to be alarmed, and therefore only
stared, hoping to recognize Morrel. The figure advanced
towards the bed and appeared to listen with profound
attention. At this moment a ray of light glanced across the
face of the midnight visitor.
"It is not he," she murmured, and waited, in the assurance
that this was but a dream, for the man to disappear or
assume some other form. Still, she felt her pulse, and finding
it throb violently she remembered that the best method of
dispelling such illusions was to drink, for a draught of the
beverage prepared by the doctor to allay her fever seemed to
cause a reaction of the brain, and for a short time she
suffered less. Valentine therefore reached her hand towards
the glass, but as soon as her trembling arm left the bed the
apparition advanced more quickly towards her, and
approached the young girl so closely that she fancied she
heard his breath, and felt the pressure of his hand.
This time the illusion, or rather the reality, surpassed
anything Valentine had before experienced; she began to
believe herself really alive and awake, and the belief that her
reason was this time not deceived made her shudder. The
pressure she felt was evidently intended to arrest her arm,
and she slowly withdrew it. Then the figure, from whom she
could not detach her eyes, and who appeared more
protecting than menacing, took the glass, and walking
towards the night-light held it up, as if to test its
transparency. This did not seem sufficient; the man, or rather
the ghost -- for he trod so softly that no sound was heard -then poured out about a spoonful into the glass, and drank it.
Valentine witnessed this scene with a sentiment of
stupefaction. Every minute she had expected that it would
vanish and give place to another vision; but the man, instead
of dissolving like a shadow, again approached her, and said
in an agitated voice, "Now you may drink."
Valentine shuddered. It was the first time one of these
visions had ever addressed her in a living voice, and she was
about to utter an exclamation. The man placed his finger on
her lips. "The Count of Monte Cristo!" she murmured.
401


CHAPTER 100 THE APPARITION

It was easy to see that no doubt now remained in the young
girl's mind as to the reality of the scene; her eyes started with
terror, her hands trembled, and she rapidly drew the
bedclothes closer to her. Still, the presence of Monte Cristo at
such an hour, his mysterious, fanciful, and extraordinary
entrance into her room through the wall, might well seem
impossibilities to her shattered reason. "Do not call any one
-- do not be alarmed," said the Count; "do not let a shade of
suspicion or uneasiness remain in your breast; the man
standing before you, Valentine (for this time it is no ghost), is
nothing more than the tenderest father and the most
respectful friend you could dream of."
Valentine could not reply; the voice which indicated the real
presence of a being in the room, alarmed her so much that
she feared to utter a syllable; still the expression of her eyes
seemed to inquire, "If your intentions are pure, why are you
here?" The count's marvellous sagacity understood all that
was passing in the young girl's mind.
"Listen to me," he said, "or, rather, look upon me; look at my
face, paler even than usual, and my eyes, red with weariness
-- for four days I have not closed them, for I have been
constantly watching you, to protect and preserve you for
Maximilian." The blood mounted rapidly to the cheeks of
Valentine, for the name just announced by the count
dispelled all the fear with which his presence had inspired
her. "Maximilian!" she exclaimed, and so sweet did the
sound appear to her, that she repeated it -- "Maximilian! -has he then owned all to you?"
"Everything. He told me your life was his, and I have
promised him that you shall live."
"You have promised him that I shall live?"
"Yes."
"But, sir, you spoke of vigilance and protection. Are you a
doctor?"
"Yes; the best you could have at the present time, believe
me."

which refreshed me so much, and seemed to ease my aching
brain. Thank you, sir, thank you!"
"This is how you have lived during the last four nights,
Valentine," said the count. "But, oh, how I passed that time!
Oh, the wretched hours I have endured -- the torture to
which I have submitted when I saw the deadly poison
poured into your glass, and how I trembled lest you should
drink it before I could find time to throw it away!"
"Sir," said Valentine, at the height of her terror, "you say you
endured tortures when you saw the deadly poison poured
into my glass; but if you saw this, you must also have seen
the person who poured it?"
"Yes." Valentine raised herself in bed, and drew over her
chest, which appeared whiter than snow, the embroidered
cambric, still moist with the cold dews of delirium, to which
were now added those of terror. "You saw the person?"
repeated the young girl. "Yes," repeated the count.
"What you tell me is horrible, sir. You wish to make me
believe something too dreadful. What? -- attempt to murder
me in my father's house, in my room, on my bed of sickness?
Oh, leave me, sir; you are tempting me -- you make me
doubt the goodness of providence -- it is impossible, it
cannot be!"
"Are you the first that this hand has stricken? Have you not
seen M. de Saint-Meran, Madame de Saint-Meran, Barrois,
all fall? would not M. Noirtier also have fallen a victim, had
not the treatment he has been pursuing for the last three
years neutralized the effects of the poison?"
"Oh, heaven," said Valentine; "is this the reason why
grandpapa has made me share all his beverages during the
last month?"
"And have they all tasted of a slightly bitter flavor, like that
of dried orange-peel?"
"Oh, yes, yes!"
"Then that explains all," said Monte Cristo. "Your
grandfather knows, then, that a poisoner lives here; perhaps
he even suspects the person. He has been fortifying you, his
beloved child, against the fatal effects of the poison, which
has failed because your system was already impregnated
with it. But even this would have availed little against a
more deadly medium of death employed four days ago,
which is generally but too fatal."

"But you say you have watched?" said Valentine uneasily;
"where have you been? -- I have not seen you." The count
extended his hand towards the library. "I was hidden behind
that door," he said, "which leads into the next house, which I
have rented." Valentine turned her eyes away, and, with an
indignant expression of pride and modest fear, exclaimed:
"Sir, I think you have been guilty of an unparalleled
intrusion, and that what you call protection is more like an "But who, then, is this assassin, this murderer?"
insult."
"Let me also ask you a question. Have you never seen any
"Valentine," he answered, "during my long watch over you, one enter your room at night?"
all I have observed has been what people visited you, what "Oh, yes; I have frequently seen shadows pass close to me,
nourishment was prepared, and what beverage was served; approach, and disappear; but I took them for visions raised
then, when the latter appeared dangerous to me, I entered, by my feverish imagination, and indeed when you entered I
as I have now done, and substituted, in the place of the thought I was under the influence of delirium."
poison, a healthful draught; which, instead of producing the
"Then you do not know who it is that attempts your life?"
death intended, caused life to circulate in your veins."
"Poison -- death!" exclaimed Valentine, half believing herself "No," said Valentine; "who could desire my death?"
under the influence of some feverish hallucination; "what are
you saying, sir?"
"Hush, my child," said Monte Cristo, again placing his finger
upon her lips, "I did say poison and death. But drink some of
this;" and the count took a bottle from his pocket, containing
a red liquid, of which he poured a few drops into the glass.
"Drink this, and then take nothing more to-night." Valentine
stretched out her hand, but scarcely had she touched the
glass when she drew back in fear. Monte Cristo took the
glass, drank half its contents, and then presented it to
Valentine, who smiled and swallowed the rest. "Oh, yes," she
exclaimed, "I recognize the flavor of my nocturnal beverage
402

"You shall know it now, then," said Monte Cristo, listening.
"How do you mean?" said Valentine, looking anxiously
around.
"Because you are not feverish or delirious to-night, but
thoroughly awake; midnight is striking, which is the hour
murderers choose."
"Oh, heavens," exclaimed Valentine, wiping off the drops
which ran down her forehead. Midnight struck slowly and
sadly; every hour seemed to strike with leaden weight upon
the heart of the poor girl. "Valentine," said the count,
"summon up all your courage; still the beatings of your heart;

do not let a sound escape you, and feign to be asleep; then
you will see." Valentine seized the count's hand. "I think I
hear a noise," she said; "leave me."

was filled with gratitude. Before closing the door he turned
around once more, and said, "Not a movement -- not a word;
let them think you asleep, or perhaps you may be killed
before I have the power of helping you." And with this
"Good-by, for the present," replied the count, walking upon
fearful injunction the count disappeared through the door,
tiptoe towards the library door, and smiling with an
which noiselessly closed after him.
expression so sad and paternal that the young girl's heart

403


CHAPTER 101 LOCUSTA


Chapter 101 Locusta

V

alentine was alone; two other clocks, slower than that of
Saint-Philippe du Roule, struck the hour of midnight
from different directions, and excepting the rumbling of a
few carriages all was silent. Then Valentine's attention was
engrossed by the clock in her room, which marked the
seconds. She began counting them, remarking that they were
much slower than the beatings of her heart; and still she
doubted, -- the inoffensive Valentine could not imagine that
any one should desire her death. Why should they? To what
end? What had she done to excite the malice of an enemy?
There was no fear of her falling asleep. One terrible idea
pressed upon her mind, -- that some one existed in the world
who had attempted to assassinate her, and who was about to
endeavor to do so again. Supposing this person, wearied at
the inefficacy of the poison, should, as Monte Cristo
intimated, have recourse to steel! -- What if the count should
have no time to run to her rescue! -- What if her last
moments were approaching, and she should never again see
Morrel! When this terrible chain of ideas presented itself,
Valentine was nearly persuaded to ring the bell, and call for
help. But through the door she fancied she saw the luminous
eye of the count -- that eye which lived in her memory, and
the recollection overwhelmed her with so much shame that
she asked herself whether any amount of gratitude could
ever repay his adventurous and devoted friendship.

the most delicate organs of our frame, generally so easy to
accomplish, became almost impossible at this moment, so
much did curiosity struggle to retain the eyelid open and
learn the truth. Madame de Villefort, however, reassured by
the silence, which was alone disturbed by the regular
breathing of Valentine, again extended her hand, and half
hidden by the curtains succeeded in emptying the contents
of the phial into the glass. Then she retired so gently that
Valentine did not know she had left the room. She only
witnessed the withdrawal of the arm -- the fair round arm of
a woman but twenty-five years old, and who yet spread
death around her.

Twenty minutes, twenty tedious minutes, passed thus, then
ten more, and at last the clock struck the half-flour. Just then
the sound of finger-nails slightly grating against the door of
the library informed Valentine that the count was still
watching, and recommended her to do the same; at the same
time, on the opposite side, that is towards Edward's room,
Valentine fancied that she heard the creaking of the floor;
she listened attentively, holding her breath till she was
nearly suffocated; the lock turned, and the door slowly
opened. Valentine had raised herself upon her elbow, and
had scarcely time to throw herself down on the bed and
shade her eyes with her arm; then, trembling, agitated, and
her heart beating with indescribable terror, she awaited the
event.

"Did you recognize?" Valentine groaned. "Oh, yes;" she said,
"I saw, but I cannot believe!"

Some one approached the bed and drew back the curtains.
Valentine summoned every effort, and breathed with that
regular respiration which announces tranquil sleep.
"Valentine!" said a low voice. Still silent: Valentine had
promised not to awake. Then everything was still, excepting
that Valentine heard the almost noiseless sound of some
liquid being poured into the glass she had just emptied.
Then she ventured to open her eyelids, and glance over her
extended arm. She saw a woman in a white dressing-gown
pouring a liquor from a phial into her glass. During this
short time Valentine must have held her breath, or moved in
some slight degree, for the woman, disturbed, stopped and
leaned over the bed, in order the better to ascertain whether
Valentine slept -- it was Madame de Villefort.
On recognizing her step-mother, Valentine could not repress
a shudder, which caused a vibration in the bed. Madame de
Villefort instantly stepped back close to the wall, and there,
shaded by the bed-curtains, she silently and attentively
watched the slightest movement of Valentine. The latter
recollected the terrible caution of Monte Cristo; she fancied
that the hand not holding the phial clasped a long sharp
knife. Then collecting all her remaining strength, she forced
herself to close her eyes; but this simple operation upon
404

It is impossible to describe the sensations experienced by
Valentine during the minute and a half Madame de Villefort
remained in the room. The grating against the library-door
aroused the young girl from the stupor in which she was
plunged, and which almost amounted to insensibility. She
raised her head with an effort. The noiseless door again
turned on its hinges, and the Count of Monte Cristo
reappeared. "Well," said he, "do you still doubt?"
"Oh," murmured the young girl.
"Have you seen?"
"Alas!"

"Would you rather die, then, and cause Maximilian's death?"
"Oh," repeated the young girl, almost bewildered, "can I not
leave the house? -- can I not escape?"
"Valentine, the hand which now threatens you will pursue
you everywhere; your servants will be seduced with gold,
and death will be offered to you disguised in every shape.
You will find it in the water you drink from the spring, in the
fruit you pluck from the tree."
"But did you not say that my kind grandfather's precaution
had neutralized the poison?"
"Yes, but not against a strong dose; the poison will be
changed, and the quantity increased." He took the glass and
raised it to his lips. "It is already done," he said; "brucine is
no longer employed, but a simple narcotic! I can recognize
the flavor of the alcohol in which it has been dissolved. If
you had taken what Madame de Villefort has poured into
your glass, Valentine -- Valentine -- you would have been
doomed!"
"But," exclaimed the young girl, "why am I thus pursued?"
"Why? -- are you so kind -- so good -- so unsuspicious of ill,
that you cannot understand, Valentine?"
"No, I have never injured her."
"But you are rich, Valentine; you have 200,000 livres a year,
and you prevent her son from enjoying these 200,000 livres."
"How so? The fortune is not her gift, but is inherited from
my relations."
"Certainly; and that is why M. and Madame de Saint-Meran
have died; that is why M. Noirtier was sentenced the day he
made you his heir; that is why you, in your turn, are to die -it is because your father would inherit your property, and
your brother, his only son, succeed to his."

"Edward? Poor child! Are all these crimes committed on his "Whatever may happen, Valentine, do not be alarmed;
account?"
though you suffer; though you lose sight, hearing,
consciousness, fear nothing; though you should awake and
"Ah, then you at length understand?"
be ignorant where you are, still do not fear; even though you
"Heaven grant that this may not be visited upon him!"
should find yourself in a sepulchral vault or coffin. Reassure
yourself, then, and say to yourself: `At this moment, a friend,
"Valentine, you are an angel!"
a father, who lives for my happiness and that of Maximilian,
"But why is my grandfather allowed to live?"
watches over me!'"
"It was considered, that you dead, the fortune would "Alas, alas, what a fearful extremity!"
naturally revert to your brother, unless he were disinherited;
and besides, the crime appearing useless, it would be folly to "Valentine, would you rather denounce your stepmother?"
commit it."
"I would rather die a hundred times -- oh, yes, die!"
"And is it possible that this frightful combination of crimes "No, you will not die; but will you promise me, whatever
has been invented by a woman?"
happens, that you will not complain, but hope?"
"Do you recollect in the arbor of the Hotel des Postes, at
Perugia, seeing a man in a brown cloak, whom your
stepmother was questioning upon aqua tofana? Well, ever
since then, the infernal project has been ripening in her
brain."
"Ah, then, indeed, sir," said the sweet girl, bathed in tears, "I
see that I am condemned to die!"
"No, Valentine, for I have foreseen all their plots; no, your
enemy is conquered since we know her, and you will live,
Valentine -- live to be happy yourself, and to confer
happiness upon a noble heart; but to insure this you must
rely on me."
"Command me, sir -- what am I to do?"
"You must blindly take what I give you."
"Alas, were it only for my own sake, I should prefer to die!"
"You must not confide in any one -- not even in your father."
"My father is not engaged in this fearful plot, is he, sir?"
asked Valentine, clasping her hands.
"No; and yet your father, a man accustomed to judicial
accusations, ought to have known that all these deaths have
not happened naturally; it is he who should have watched
over you -- he should have occupied my place -- he should
have emptied that glass -- he should have risen against the
assassin. Spectre against spectre!" he murmured in a low
voice, as he concluded his sentence.

"I will think of Maximilian!"
"You are my own darling child, Valentine! I alone can save
you, and I will." Valentine in the extremity of her terror
joined her hands, -- for she felt that the moment had arrived
to ask for courage, -- and began to pray, and while uttering
little more than incoherent words, she forgot that her white
shoulders had no other covering than her long hair, and that
the pulsations of her heart could he seen through the lace of
her nightdress. Monte Cristo gently laid his hand on the
young girl's arm, drew the velvet coverlet close to her throat,
and said with a paternal smile, -- "My child, believe in my
devotion to you as you believe in the goodness of
providence and the love of Maximilian."
Then he drew from his waistcoat-pocket the little emerald
box, raised the golden lid, and took from it a pastille about
the size of a pea, which he placed in her hand. She took it,
and looked attentively on the count; there was an expression
on the face of her intrepid protector which commanded her
veneration. She evidently interrogated him by her look.
"Yes," said he. Valentine carried the pastille to her mouth,
and swallowed it. "And now, my dear child, adieu for the
present. I will try and gain a little sleep, for you are saved."
"Go," said Valentine, "whatever happens, I promise you not
to fear."

Monte Cristo for some time kept his eyes fixed on the young
girl, who gradually fell asleep, yielding to the effects of the
narcotic the count had given her. Then he took the glass,
"Sir," said Valentine, "I will do all I can to live. for there are emptied three parts of the contents in the fireplace, that it
two beings whose existence depends upon mine -- my might be supposed Valentine had taken it, and replaced it on
grandfather and Maximilian."
the table; then he disappeared, after throwing a farewell
glance on Valentine, who slept with the confidence and
"I will watch over them as I have over you."
innocence of an angel.
"Well, sir, do as you will with me;" and then she added, in a
low voice, "oh, heavens, what will befall me?"

405


CHAPTER 102 VALENTINE


Chapter 102 Valentine

T

he night-light continued to burn on the chimney-piece,
exhausting the last drops of oil which floated on the
surface of the water. The globe of the lamp appeared of a
reddish hue, and the flame, brightening before it expired,
threw out the last flickerings which in an inanimate object
have been so often compared with the convulsions of a
human creature in its final agonies. A dull and dismal light
was shed over the bedclothes and curtains surrounding the
young girl. All noise in the streets had ceased, and the
silence was frightful. It was then that the door of Edward's
room opened, and a head we have before noticed appeared
in the glass opposite; it was Madame de Villefort, who came
to witness the effects of the drink she had prepared. She
stopped in the doorway, listened for a moment to the
flickering of the lamp, the only sound in that deserted room,
and then advanced to the table to see if Valentine's glass
were empty. It was still about a quarter full, as we before
stated. Madame de Villefort emptied the contents into the
ashes, which she disturbed that they might the more readily
absorb the liquid; then she carefully rinsed the glass, and
wiping it with her handkerchief replaced it on the table.
If any one could have looked into the room just then he
would have noticed the hesitation with which Madame de
Villefort approached the bed and looked fixedly on
Valentine. The dim light, the profound silence, and the
gloomy thoughts inspired by the hour, and still more by her
own conscience, all combined to produce a sensation of fear;
the poisoner was terrified at the contemplation of her own
work. At length she rallied, drew aside the curtain, and
leaning over the pillow gazed intently on Valentine. The
young girl no longer breathed, no breath issued through the
half-closed teeth; the white lips no longer quivered -- the
eyes were suffused with a bluish vapor, and the long black
lashes rested on a cheek white as wax. Madame de Villefort
gazed upon the face so expressive even in its stillness; then
she ventured to raise the coverlet and press her hand upon
the young girl's heart. It was cold and motionless. She only
felt the pulsation in her own fingers, and withdrew her hand
with a shudder. One arm was hanging out of the bed; from
shoulder to elbow it was moulded after the arms of Germain
Pillon's "Graces,"* but the fore-arm seemed to be slightly
distorted by convulsion, and the hand, so delicately formed,
was resting with stiff outstretched fingers on the framework
of the bed. The nails, too, were turning blue.
* Germain Pillon was a famous French sculptor (1535-1598).
His best known work is "The Three Graces," now in the
Louvre.
Madame de Villefort had no longer any doubt; all was over
-- she had consummated the last terrible work she had to
accomplish. There was no more to do in the room, so the
poisoner retired stealthily, as though fearing to hear the
sound of her own footsteps; but as she withdrew she still
held aside the curtain, absorbed in the irresistible attraction
always exerted by the picture of death, so long as it is merely
mysterious and does not excite disgust. Just then the lamp
again flickered; the noise startled Madame de Villefort, who
shuddered and dropped the curtain. Immediately afterwards
the light expired, and the room was plunged in frightful
obscurity, while the clock at that minute struck half-past four.
Overpowered with agitation, the poisoner succeeded in
groping her way to the door, and reached her room in an
406

agony of fear.
The darkness lasted two hours longer; then by degrees a cold
light crept through the Venetian blinds, until at length it
revealed the objects in the room. About this time the nurse's
cough was heard on the stairs and the woman entered the
room with a cup in her hand. To the tender eye of a father or
a lover, the first glance would have sufficed to reveal
Valentine's condition; but to this hireling, Valentine only
appeared to sleep. "Good," she exclaimed, approaching the
table, "she has taken part of her draught; the glass is
three-quarters empty."
Then she went to the fireplace and lit the fire, and although
she had just left her bed, she could not resist the temptation
offered by Valentine's sleep, so she threw herself into an
arm-chair to snatch a little more rest. The clock striking eight
awoke her. Astonished at the prolonged slumber of the
patient, and frightened to see that the arm was still hanging
out of the bed, she advanced towards Valentine, and for the
first time noticed the white lips. She tried to replace the arm,
but it moved with a frightful rigidity which could not
deceive a sick-nurse. She screamed aloud; then running to
the door exclaimed, -- "Help, help!"
"What is the matter?" asked M. d'Avrigny, at the foot of the
stairs, it being the hour he usually visited her.
"What is it?" asked Villefort, rushing from his room. "Doctor,
do you hear them call for help?"
"Yes, yes; let us hasten up; it was in Valentine's room." But
before the doctor and the father could reach the room, the
servants who were on the same floor had entered, and seeing
Valentine pale and motionless on her bed, they lifted up
their hands towards heaven and stood transfixed, as though
struck by lightening. "Call Madame de Villefort! -- wake
Madame de Villefort!" cried the procureur from the door of
his chamber, which apparently he scarcely dared to leave.
But instead of obeying him, the servants stood watching M.
d'Avrigny, who ran to Valentine, and raised her in his arms.
"What? -- this one, too?" he exclaimed. "Oh, where will be the
end?" Villefort rushed into the room. "What are you saying,
doctor?" he exclaimed, raising his hands to heaven.
"I say that Valentine is dead!" replied d'Avrigny, in a voice
terrible in its solemn calm.
M. de Villefort staggered and buried his head in the bed. On
the exclamation of the doctor and the cry of the father, the
servants all fled with muttered imprecations; they were
heard running down the stairs and through the long
passages, then there was a rush in the court, afterwards all
was still; they had, one and all, deserted the accursed house.
Just then, Madame de Villefort, in the act of slipping on her
dressing-gown, threw aside the drapery and for a moment
stood motionless, as though interrogating the occupants of
the room, while she endeavored to call up some rebellious
tears. On a sudden she stepped, or rather bounded, with
outstretched arms, towards the table. She saw d'Avrigny
curiously examining the glass, which she felt certain of
having emptied during the night. It was now a third full, just
as it was when she threw the contents into the ashes. The
spectre of Valentine rising before the poisoner would have
alarmed her less. It was, indeed, the same color as the
draught she had poured into the glass, and which Valentine
had drank; it was indeed the poison, which could not

deceive M. d'Avrigny, which he now examined so closely; it
was doubtless a miracle from heaven, that, notwithstanding
her precautions, there should be some trace, some proof
remaining to reveal the crime. While Madame de Villefort
remained rooted to the spot like a statue of terror, and
Villefort, with his head hidden in the bedclothes, saw
nothing around him, d'Avrigny approached the window,
that he might the better examine the contents of the glass,
and dipping the tip of his finger in, tasted it. "Ah," he
exclaimed, "it is no longer brucine that is used; let me see
what it is!"

He waited for a moment in the hall and called for a servant
to conduct him to M. Noirtier; but no one answered, the
servants having, as we know, deserted the house. Morrel
had no particular reason for uneasiness; Monte Cristo had
promised him that Valentine should live, and so far he had
always fulfilled his word. Every night the count had given
him news, which was the next morning confirmed by
Noirtier. Still this extraordinary silence appeared strange to
him, and he called a second and third time; still no answer.
Then he determined to go up. Noirtier's room was opened,
like all the rest. The first thing he saw was the old man
sitting in his arm-chair in his usual place, but his eyes
Then he ran to one of the cupboards in Valentine's room,
expressed alarm, which was confirmed by the pallor which
which had been transformed into a medicine closet, and
overspread his features.
taking from its silver case a small bottle of nitric acid,
dropped a little of it into the liquor, which immediately "How are you, sir?" asked Morrel, with a sickness of heart.
changed to a blood-red color. "Ah," exclaimed d'Avrigny, in
"Well," answered the old man, by closing his eyes; but his
a voice in which the horror of a judge unveiling the truth
appearance manifested increasing uneasiness.
was mingled with the delight of a student making a
discovery. Madame de Villefort was overpowered, her eyes "You are thoughtful, sir," continued Morrel; "you want
first flashed and then swam, she staggered towards the door something; shall I call one of the servants?"
and disappeared. Directly afterwards the distant sound of a "Yes," replied Noirtier.
heavy weight falling on the ground was heard, but no one
paid any attention to it; the nurse was engaged in watching Morrel pulled the bell, but though he nearly broke the cord
the chemical analysis, and Villefort was still absorbed in no one answered. He turned towards Noirtier; the pallor and
grief. M. d'Avrigny alone had followed Madame de Villefort anguish expressed on his countenance momentarily
with his eyes, and watched her hurried retreat. He lifted up increased.
the drapery over the entrance to Edward's room, and his eye "Oh," exclaimed Morrel, "why do they not come? Is any one
reaching as far as Madame de Villefort's apartment, he ill in the house?" The eyes of Noirtier seemed as though they
beheld her extended lifeless on the floor. "Go to the would start from their sockets. "What is the matter? You
assistance of Madame de Villefort," he said to the nurse. alarm me. Valentine? Valentine?"
"Madame de Villefort is ill."
"Yes, yes," signed Noirtier. Maximilian tried to speak, but he
"But Mademoiselle de Villefort " -- stammered the nurse.
could articulate nothing; he staggered, and supported
"Mademoiselle de Villefort no longer requires help," said himself against the wainscot. Then he pointed to the door.
d'Avrigny, "since she is dead."

"Yes, yes, yes!" continued the old man. Maximilian rushed
"Dead, -- dead!" groaned forth Villefort, in a paroxysm of up the little staircase, while Noirtier's eyes seemed to say, -grief, which was the more terrible from the novelty of the "Quicker, quicker!"
sensation in the iron heart of that man.
In a minute the young man darted through several rooms,
"Dead!" repeated a third voice. "Who said Valentine was till at length he reached Valentine's. There was no occasion
to push the door, it was wide open. A sob was the only
dead?"
sound he heard. He saw as though in a mist, a black figure
The two men turned round, and saw Morrel standing at the kneeling and buried in a confused mass of white drapery. A
door, pale and terror-stricken. This is what had happened. terrible fear transfixed him. It was then he heard a voice
At the usual time, Morrel had presented himself at the little exclaim "Valentine is dead!" and another voice which, like an
door leading to Noirtier's room. Contrary to custom, the echo repeated, -- "Dead, -- dead!"
door was open, and having no occasion to ring he entered.

407


CHAPTER 103 MAXIMILIAN


Chapter 103 Maximilian

V

illefort rose, half ashamed of being surprised in such a
paroxysm of grief. The terrible office he had held for
twenty-five years had succeeded in making him more or less
than man. His glance, at first wandering, fixed itself upon
Morrel. "Who are you, sir," he asked, "that forget that this is
not the manner to enter a house stricken with death? Go, sir,
go!" But Morrel remained motionless; he could not detach
his eyes from that disordered bed, and the pale corpse of the
young girl who was lying on it. "Go! -- do you hear?" said
Villefort, while d'Avrigny advanced to lead Morrel out.
Maximilian stared for a moment at the corpse, gazed all
around the room, then upon the two men; he opened his
mouth to speak, but finding it impossible to give utterance to
the innumerable ideas that occupied his brain, he went out,
thrusting his hands through his hair in such a manner that
Villefort and d'Avrigny, for a moment diverted from the
engrossing topic, exchanged glances, which seemed to say, -"He is mad!"
But in less than five minutes the staircase groaned beneath
an extraordinary weight. Morrel was seen carrying, with
superhuman strength, the arm-chair containing Noirtier
up-stairs. When he reached the landing he placed the
arm-chair on the floor and rapidly rolled it into Valentine's
room. This could only have been accomplished by means of
unnatural strength supplied by powerful excitement. But the
most fearful spectacle was Noirtier being pushed towards
the bed, his face expressing all his meaning, and his eyes
supplying the want of every other faculty. That pale face and
flaming glance appeared to Villefort like a frightful
apparition. Each time he had been brought into contact with
his father, something terrible had happened. "See what they
have done!" cried Morrel, with one hand leaning on the back
of the chair, and the other extended towards Valentine. "See,
my father, see!"

attracted towards him by the irresistible magnetism which
draws us towards those who have loved the people for
whom we mourn, extended his hand towards the young
man. But Morrel saw nothing; he had grasped the hand of
Valentine, and unable to weep vented his agony in groans as
he bit the sheets. For some time nothing was heard in that
chamber but sobs, exclamations, and prayers. At length
Villefort, the most composed of all, spoke: "Sir," said he to
Maximilian, "you say you loved Valentine, that you were
betrothed to her. I knew nothing of this engagement, of this
love, yet I, her father, forgive you, for I see that your grief is
real and deep; and besides my own sorrow is too great for
anger to find a place in my heart. But you see that the angel
whom you hoped for has left this earth -- she has nothing
more to do with the adoration of men. Take a last farewell,
sir, of her sad remains; take the hand you expected to
possess once more within your own, and then separate
yourself from her forever. Valentine now requires only the
ministrations of the priest."
"You are mistaken, sir," exclaimed Morrel, raising himself on
one knee, his heart pierced by a more acute pang than any he
had yet felt -- "you are mistaken; Valentine, dying as she has,
not only requires a priest, but an avenger. You, M. de
Villefort, send for the priest; I will be the avenger."
"What do you mean, sir?" asked Villefort, trembling at the
new idea inspired by the delirium of Morrel.
"I tell you, sir, that two persons exist in you; the father has
mourned sufficiently, now let the procureur fulfil his office."
The eyes of Noirtier glistened, and d'Avrigny approached.

"Gentlemen," said Morrel, reading all that passed through
the minds of the witnesses to the scene, "I know what I am
saying, and you know as well as I do what I am about to say
-- Valentine has been assassinated!" Villefort hung his head,
Villefort drew back and looked with astonishment on the d'Avrigny approached nearer, and Noirtier said "Yes" with
young man, who, almost a stranger to him, called Noirtier his eyes. "Now, sir," continued Morrel, "in these days no one
his father. At this moment the whole soul of the old man can disappear by violent means without some inquiries
seemed centred in his eyes which became bloodshot; the being made as to the cause of her disappearance, even were
veins of the throat swelled; his cheeks and temples became she not a young, beautiful, and adorable creature like
purple, as though he was struck with epilepsy; nothing was Valentine. Mr. Procureur," said Morrel with increasing
wanting to complete this but the utterance of a cry. And the vehemence, "no mercy is allowed; I denounce the crime; it is
cry issued from his pores, if we may thus speak -- a cry your place to seek the assassin." The young man's implacable
frightful in its silence. D'Avrigny rushed towards the old eyes interrogated Villefort, who, on his side, glanced from
man and made him inhale a powerful restorative.
Noirtier to d'Avrigny. But instead of finding sympathy in the
"Sir," cried Morrel, seizing the moist hand of the paralytic, eyes of the doctor and his father, he only saw an expression
"they ask me who I am, and what right I have to be here. Oh, as inflexible as that of Maximilian. "Yes," indicated the old
you know it, tell them, tell them!" And the young man's man.
voice was choked by sobs. As for the old man, his chest "Assuredly," said d'Avrigny.
heaved with his panting respiration. One could have thought
that he was undergoing the agonies preceding death. At "Sir," said Villefort, striving to struggle against this triple
length, happier than the young man, who sobbed without force and his own emotion, -- "sir, you are deceived; no one
weeping, tears glistened in the eyes of Noirtier. "Tell them," commits crimes here. I am stricken by fate. It is horrible,
said Morrel in a hoarse voice, "tell them that I am her indeed, but no one assassinates."
betrothed. Tell them she was my beloved, my noble girl, my The eyes of Noirtier lighted up with rage, and d'Avrigny
only blessing in the world. Tell them -- oh, tell them, that prepared to speak. Morrel, however, extended his arm, and
corpse belongs to me!"
commanded silence. "And I say that murders are committed
The young man overwhelmed by the weight of his anguish, here," said Morrel, whose voice, though lower in tone, lost
fell heavily on his knees before the bed, which his fingers none of its terrible distinctness: "I tell you that this is the
grasped with convulsive energy. D'Avrigny, unable to bear fourth victim within the last four months. I tell you,
the sight of this touching emotion, turned away; and Valentine's life was attempted by poison four days ago,
Villefort, without seeking any further explanation, and though she escaped, owing to the precautions of M. Noirtier.
I tell you that the dose has been double, the poison changed,
408

and that this time it has succeeded. I tell you that you know
these things as well as I do, since this gentleman has
forewarned you, both as a doctor and as a friend."

"But can he understand you?"
"Yes."

"Oh," said Villefort, inexpressibly delighted to think that the
inquiries were to be made by him alone, -- "oh, be satisfied, I
can understand my father." D'Avrigny took the young man's
"I rave?" said Morrel; "well, then, I appeal to M. d'Avrigny arm, and led him out of the room. A more than deathlike
himself. Ask him, sir, if he recollects the words he uttered in silence then reigned in the house. At the end of a quarter of
the garden of this house on the night of Madame de an hour a faltering footstep was heard, and Villefort
Saint-Meran's death. You thought yourselves alone, and appeared at the door of the apartment where d'Avrigny and
talked about that tragical death, and the fatality you Morrel had been staying, one absorbed in meditation, the
mentioned then is the same which has caused the murder of other in grief. "You can come," he said, and led them back to
Valentine." Villefort and d'Avrigny exchanged looks. "Yes, Noirtier. Morrel looked attentively on Villefort. His face was
yes," continued Morrel; "recall the scene, for the words you livid, large drops rolled down his face, and in his fingers he
thought were only given to silence and solitude fell into my held the fragments of a quill pen which he had torn to atoms.
ears. Certainly, after witnessing the culpable indolence
"Gentlemen," he said in a hoarse voice, "give me your word
manifested by M. de Villefort towards his own relations, I
of honor that this horrible secret shall forever remain buried
ought to have denounced him to the authorities; then I
amongst ourselves!" The two men drew back.
should not have been an accomplice to thy death, as I now
am, sweet, beloved Valentine; but the accomplice shall "I entreat you." -- continued Villefort.
become the avenger. This fourth murder is apparent to all, "But," said Morrel, "the culprit -- the murderer -- the
and if thy father abandon thee, Valentine, it is I, and I swear assassin."
it, that shall pursue the assassin." And this time, as though
nature had at least taken compassion on the vigorous frame, "Do not alarm yourself, sir; justice will be done," said
nearly bursting with its own strength, the words of Morrel Villefort. "My father has revealed the culprit's name; my
were stifled in his throat; his breast heaved; the tears, so long father thirsts for revenge as much as you do, yet even he
rebellious, gushed from his eyes; and he threw himself conjures you as I do to keep this secret. Do you not, father?"
weeping on his knees by the side of the bed.
"Yes," resolutely replied Noirtier. Morrel suffered an
exclamation of horror and surprise to escape him. "Oh, sir,"
said Villefort, arresting Maximilian by the arm, "if my father,
Then d'Avrigny spoke. "And I, too," he exclaimed in a low the inflexible man, makes this request, it is because he knows,
voice, "I unite with M. Morrel in demanding justice for crime; be assured, that Valentine will be terribly revenged. Is it not
my blood boils at the idea of having encouraged a murderer so, father?" The old man made a sign in the affirmative.
by my cowardly concession."
Villefort continued: "He knows me, and I have pledged my
"Oh, merciful heavens!" murmured Villefort. Morrel raised word to him. Rest assured, gentlemen, that within three days,
his head, and reading the eyes of the old man, which in a less time than justice would demand, the revenge I shall
gleamed with unnatural lustre, -- "Stay," he said, "M. Noirtier have taken for the murder of my child will be such as to
make the boldest heart tremble;" and as he spoke these
wishes to speak."
words he ground his teeth, and grasped the old man's
"Yes," indicated Noirtier, with an expression the more
senseless hand.
terrible, from all his faculties being centred in his glance.
"Will this promise be fulfilled, M. Noirtier?" asked Morrel,
"Do you know the assassin?" asked Morrel.
while d'Avrigny looked inquiringly.
"Yes," replied Noirtier.
"Yes," replied Noirtier with an expression of sinister joy.
"And will you direct us?" exclaimed the young man. "Listen,
"Swear, then," said Villefort, joining the hands of Morrel and
M. d'Avrigny, listen!" Noirtier looked upon Morrel with one
d'Avrigny, "swear that you will spare the honor of my house,
of those melancholy smiles which had so often made
and leave me to avenge my child." D'Avrigny turned round
Valentine happy, and thus fixed his attention. Then, having
and uttered a very feeble "Yes," but Morrel, disengaging his
riveted the eyes of his interlocutor on his own, he glanced
hand, rushed to the bed, and after having pressed the cold
towards the door.
lips of Valentine with his own, hurriedly left, uttering a long,
"Do you wish me to leave?" said Morrel, sadly.
deep groan of despair and anguish. We have before stated
that all the servants had fled. M. de Villefort was therefore
"Yes," replied Noirtier.
obliged to request M. d'Avrigny to superintend all the
"Alas, alas, sir, have pity on me!"
arrangements consequent upon a death in a large city, more
especially a death under such suspicious circumstances.
The old man's eyes remained fixed on the door.
"Oh, you rave, sir," exclaimed Villefort, in vain endeavoring
to escape the net in which he was taken.

"May I, at least, return?" asked Morrel.
"Yes."
"Must I leave alone?"
"No."
"Whom am I to take with me? The procureur?"
"No."
"The doctor?"
"Yes."
"You wish to remain alone with M. de Villefort?"
"Yes."

It was something terrible to witness the silent agony, the
mute despair of Noirtier, whose tears silently rolled down
his cheeks. Villefort retired to his study, and d'Avrigny left
to summon the doctor of the mayoralty, whose office it is to
examine bodies after decease, and who is expressly named
"the doctor of the dead." M. Noirtier could not be persuaded
to quit his grandchild. At the end of a quarter of an hour M.
d'Avrigny returned with his associate; they found the outer
gate closed, and not a servant remaining in the house;
Villefort himself was obliged to open to them. But he
stopped on the landing; he had not the courage to again visit
the death chamber. The two doctors, therefore, entered the
room alone. Noirtier was near the bed, pale, motionless, and
silent as the corpse. The district doctor approached with the
409


CHAPTER 103 MAXIMILIAN

indifference of a man accustomed to spend half his time in a cassock standing on the threshold of the next door. "This
amongst the dead; he then lifted the sheet which was placed is the abbe of whom I spoke," said the doctor to d'Avrigny.
over the face, and just unclosed the lips.
D'Avrigny accosted the priest. "Sir," he said, "are you
disposed to confer a great obligation on an unhappy father
"Alas," said d'Avrigny, "she is indeed dead, poor child!"
who has just lost his daughter? I mean M. de Villefort, the
"Yes," answered the doctor laconically, dropping the sheet he king's attorney."
had raised. Noirtier uttered a kind of hoarse, rattling sound;
"Ah," said the priest, in a marked Italian accent; "yes, I have
the old man's eyes sparkled, and the good doctor
heard that death is in that house."
understood that he wished to behold his child. He therefore
approached the bed, and while his companion was dipping "Then I need not tell you what kind of service he requires of
the fingers with which he had touched the lips of the corpse you."
in chloride of lime, he uncovered the calm and pale face,
"I was about to offer myself, sir," said the priest; "it is our
which looked like that of a sleeping angel. A tear, which
mission to forestall our duties."
appeared in the old man's eye, expressed his thanks to the
doctor. The doctor of the dead then laid his permit on the "It is a young girl."
corner of the table, and having fulfilled his duty, was "I know it, sir; the servants who fled from the house
conducted out by d'Avrigny. Villefort met them at the door informed me. I also know that her name is Valentine, and I
of his study; having in a few words thanked the district have already prayed for her."
doctor, he turned to d'Avrigny, and said, -- "And now the
"Thank you, sir," said d'Avrigny; "since you have
priest."
commenced your sacred office, deign to continue it. Come
"Is there any particular priest you wish to pray with and watch by the dead, and all the wretched family will be
Valentine?" asked d'Avrigny.
grateful to you."
"No." said Villefort; "fetch the nearest."
"I am going, sir; and I do not hesitate to say that no prayers
"The nearest," said the district doctor, "is a good Italian abbe, will be more fervent than mine." D'Avrigny took the priest's
hand, and without meeting Villefort, who was engaged in
who lives next door to you. Shall I call on him as I pass?"
his study, they reached Valentine's room, which on the
"D'Avrigny," said Villefort, "be so kind, I beseech you, as to
following night was to be occupied by the undertakers. On
accompany this gentleman. Here is the key of the door, so
entering the room, Noirtier's eyes met those of the abbe, and
that you can go in and out as you please; you will bring the
no doubt he read some particular expression in them, for he
priest with you, and will oblige me by introducing him into
remained in the room. D'Avrigny recommended the
my child's room."
attention of the priest to the living as well as to the dead, and
"Do you wish to see him?"
the abbe promised to devote his prayers to Valentine and his
attentions to Noirtier. In order, doubtless, that he might not
"I only wish to be alone. You will excuse me, will you not? A
be disturbed while fulfilling his sacred mission, the priest
priest can understand a father's grief." And M. de Villefort,
rose as soon as d'Avrigny departed, and not only bolted the
giving the key to d'Avrigny, again bade farewell to the
door through which the doctor had just left, but also that
strange doctor, and retired to his study, where he began to
leading to Madame de Villefort's room.
work. For some temperaments work is a remedy for all
afflictions. As the doctors entered the street, they saw a man

410


Chapter 104 Danglars Signature

T

he next morning dawned dull and cloudy. During the
night the undertakers had executed their melancholy
office, and wrapped the corpse in the winding-sheet, which,
whatever may be said about the equality of death, is at least
a last proof of the luxury so pleasing in life. This
winding-sheet was nothing more than a beautiful piece of
cambric, which the young girl had bought a fortnight before.
During the evening two men, engaged for the purpose, had
carried Noirtier from Valentine's room into his own, and
contrary to all expectation there was no difficulty in
withdrawing him from his child. The Abbe Busoni had
watched till daylight, and then left without calling any one.
D'Avrigny returned about eight o'clock in the morning; he
met Villefort on his way to Noirtier's room, and
accompanied him to see how the old man had slept. They
found him in the large arm-chair, which served him for a
bed, enjoying a calm, nay, almost a smiling sleep. They both
stood in amazement at the door.
"See," said d'Avrigny to Villefort, "nature knows how to
alleviate the deepest sorrow. No one can say that M. Noirtier
did not love his child, and yet he sleeps."

leading men of the day at the bar, in literature, or the army,
for M. de Villefort moved in the first Parisian circles, less
owing to his social position than to his personal merit. The
cousin standing at the door ushered in the guests, and it was
rather a relief to the indifferent to see a person as unmoved
as themselves, and who did not exact a mournful face or
force tears, as would have been the case with a father, a
brother, or a lover. Those who were acquainted soon formed
into little groups. One of them was made of Debray,
Chateau-Renaud, and Beauchamp.
"Poor girl," said Debray, like the rest, paying an involuntary
tribute to the sad event, -- "poor girl, so young, so rich, so
beautiful! Could you have imagined this scene,
Chateau-Renaud, when we saw her, at the most three weeks
ago, about to sign that contract?"
"Indeed, no," said Chateau-Renaud -- "Did you know her?"
"I spoke to her once or twice at Madame de Morcerf's,
among the rest; she appeared to me charming, though rather
melancholy. Where is her stepmother? Do you know?"

"She is spending the day with the wife of the worthy
"Yes, you are right," replied Villefort, surprised; "he sleeps, gentleman who is receiving us."
indeed! And this is the more strange, since the least "Who is he?"
contradiction keeps him awake all night."
"Whom do you mean?"
"Grief has stunned him," replied d'Avrigny; and they both
"The gentleman who receives us? Is he a deputy?"
returned thoughtfully to the procureur's study.
"See, I have not slept," said Villefort, showing his
undisturbed bed; "grief does not stun me. I have not been in
bed for two nights; but then look at my desk; see what I have
written during these two days and nights. I have filled those
papers, and have made out the accusation against the
assassin Benedetto. Oh, work, work, -- my passion, my joy,
my delight, -- it is for thee to alleviate my sorrows!" and he
convulsively grasped the hand of d'Avrigny.
"Do you require my services now?" asked d'Avrigny.
"No," said Villefort; "only return again at eleven o'clock; at
twelve the -- the -- oh, heavens, my poor, poor child!" and
the procureur again becoming a man, lifted up his eyes and
groaned.
"Shall you be present in the reception room?"
"No; I have a cousin who has undertaken this sad office. I
shall work, doctor -- when I work I forget everything." And,
indeed, no sooner had the doctor left the room, than he was
again absorbed in study. On the doorsteps d'Avrigny met
the cousin whom Villefort had mentioned, a personage as
insignificant in our story as in the world he occupied -- one
of those beings designed from their birth to make themselves
useful to others. He was punctual, dressed in black, with
crape around his hat, and presented himself at his cousin's
with a face made up for the occasion, and which he could
alter as might be required. At twelve o'clock the
mourning-coaches rolled into the paved court, and the Rue
du Faubourg Saint-Honore was filled with a crowd of idlers,
equally pleased to witness the festivities or the mourning of
the rich, and who rush with the same avidity to a funeral
procession as to the marriage of a duchess.
Gradually the reception-room filled, and some of our old
friends made their appearance -- we mean Debray,
Chateau-Renaud, and Beauchamp, accompanied by all the

"Oh, no. I am condemned to witness those gentlemen every
day," said Beauchamp; "but he is perfectly unknown to me."
"Have you mentioned this death in your paper?"
"It has been mentioned, but the article is not mine; indeed, I
doubt if it will please M. Villefort, for it says that if four
successive deaths had happened anywhere else than in the
house of the king's attorney, he would have interested
himself somewhat more about it."
"Still," said Chateau-Renaud, "Dr. d'Avrigny, who attends
my mother, declares he is in despair about it. But whom are
you seeking, Debray?"
"I am seeking the Count of Monte Cristo" said the young
man.
"I met him on the boulevard, on my way here," said
Beauchamp. "I think he is about to leave Paris; he was going
to his banker."
"His banker? Danglars is his banker, is he not?" asked
Chateau-Renaud of Debray.
"I believe so," replied the secretary with slight uneasiness.
"But Monte Cristo is not the only one I miss here; I do not see
Morrel."
"Morrel? Do they know him?" asked Chateau-Renaud. "I
think he has only been introduced to Madame de Villefort."
"Still, he ought to have been here," said Debray; "I wonder
what will be talked about to-night; this funeral is the news of
the day. But hush, here comes our minister of justice; he will
feel obliged to make some little speech to the cousin," and
the three young men drew near to listen. Beauchamp told
the truth when he said that on his way to the funeral he had
met Monte Cristo, who was directing his steps towards the
Rue de la Chausse d'Antin, to M. Danglars'.
411


CHAPTER 104 DANGLARS SIGNATURE

The banker saw the carriage of the count enter the court yard,
and advanced to meet him with a sad, though affable smile.
"Well," said he, extending his hand to Monte Cristo, "I
suppose you have come to sympathize with me, for indeed
misfortune has taken possession of my house. When I
perceived you, I was just asking myself whether I had not
wished harm towards those poor Morcerfs, which would
have justified the proverb of `He who wishes misfortunes to
happen to others experiences them himself.' Well, on my
word of honor, I answered, `No!' I wished no ill to Morcerf;
he was a little proud, perhaps, for a man who like myself has
risen from nothing; but we all have our faults. Do you know,
count, that persons of our time of life -- not that you belong
to the class, you are still a young man, -- but as I was saying,
persons of our time of life have been very unfortunate this
year. For example, look at the puritanical procureur, who
has just lost his daughter, and in fact nearly all his family, in
so singular a manner; Morcerf dishonored and dead; and
then myself covered with ridicule through the villany of
Benedetto; besides" -"Besides what?" asked the Count.

the gilt mouldings on the ceiling. "Are they Spanish, Haitian,
or Neapolitan bonds?" said Monte Cristo. "No," said
Danglars, smiling, "they are bonds on the bank of France,
payable to bearer. Stay, count," he added, "you, who may he
called the emperor, if I claim the title of king of finance, have
you many pieces of paper of this size, each worth a million?"
The count took into his hands the papers, which Danglars
had so proudly presented to him, and read: -"To the Governor of the Bank. Please pay to my order, from
the fund deposited by me, the sum of a million, and charge
the same to my account.
"Baron Danglars."
"One, two, three, four, five," said Monte Cristo; "five millions
-- why what a Croesus you are!"
"This is how I transact business," said Danglars.
"It is really wonderful," said the count; "above all, if, as I
suppose, it is payable at sight."
"It is, indeed, said Danglars.

"What new calamity?"

"It is a fine thing to have such credit; really, it is only in
France these things are done. Five millions on five little
scraps of paper! -- it must be seen to be believed."

"My daughter" --

"You do not doubt it?"

"Mademoiselle Danglars?"

"No!"

"Eugenie has left us!"

"You say so with an accent -- stay, you shall be convinced;
take my clerk to the bank, and you will see him leave it with
an order on the Treasury for the same sum."

"Alas, do you not know?"

"Good heavens, what are you telling me?"
"The truth, my dear count. Oh, how happy you must be in
not having either wife or children!"

"With Madame Danglars?"

"No," said Monte Cristo folding the five notes, "most
decidedly not; the thing is so curious, I will make the
experiment myself. I am credited on you for six millions. I
have drawn nine hundred thousand francs, you therefore
still owe me five millions and a hundred thousand francs. I
will take the five scraps of paper that I now hold as bonds,
with your signature alone, and here is a receipt in full for the
six millions between us. I had prepared it beforehand, for I
am much in want of money to-day." And Monte Cristo
placed the bonds in his pocket with one hand, while with the
other he held out the receipt to Danglars. If a thunderbolt
had fallen at the banker's feet, he could not have experienced
greater terror.

"No, with a relation. But still, we have quite lost our dear
Eugenie; for I doubt whether her pride will ever allow her to
return to France."

"What," he stammered, "do you mean to keep that money?
Excuse me, excuse me, but I owe this money to the charity
fund, -- a deposit which I promised to pay this morning."

"Do you think so?"
"Indeed I do."
"And so Mademoiselle Danglars" -"She could not endure the insult offered to us by that wretch,
so she asked permission to travel."
"And is she gone?"
"The other night she left."

"Still, baron," said Monte Cristo, "family griefs, or indeed any
other affliction which would crush a man whose child was
his only treasure, are endurable to a millionaire.
Philosophers may well say, and practical men will always
support the opinion, that money mitigates many trials; and if
you admit the efficacy of this sovereign balm, you ought to
be very easily consoled -- you, the king of finance, the focus
of immeasurable power."

"Oh, well, then," said Monte Cristo, "I am not particular
about these five notes, pay me in a different form; I wished,
from curiosity, to take these, that I might be able to say that
without any advice or preparation the house of Danglars
had paid me five millions without a minute's delay; it would
have been remarkable. But here are your bonds; pay me
differently;" and he held the bonds towards Danglars, who
seized them like a vulture extending its claws to withhold
Danglars looked at him askance, as though to ascertain the food that is being wrested from its grasp. Suddenly he
whether he spoke seriously. "Yes," he answered, "if a fortune rallied, made a violent effort to restrain himself, and then a
smile gradually widened the features of his disturbed
brings consolation, I ought to be consoled; I am rich."
countenance.
"So rich, dear sir, that your fortune resembles the pyramids;
if you wished to demolish them you could not, and if it were "Certainly," he said, "your receipt is money."
possible, you would not dare!" Danglars smiled at the "Oh dear, yes; and if you were at Rome, the house of
good-natured pleasantry of the count. "That reminds me," he Thomson & French would make no more difficulty about
said, "that when you entered I was on the point of signing paying the money on my receipt than you have just done."
five little bonds; I have already signed two: will you allow
"Pardon me, count, pardon me."
me to do the same to the others?"
"Then I may keep this money?"
"Pray do so."
There was a moment's silence, during which the noise of the
banker's pen was alone heard, while Monte Cristo examined
412

"Yes," said Danglars, while the perspiration started from the
roots of his hair. "Yes, keep it -- keep it."

Monte Cristo replaced the notes in his pocket with that "Come," said Boville, with a tone of entire incredulity, "five
indescribable expression which seemed to say, "Come, reflect; millions to that gentleman who just left, and who bowed to
if you repent there is till time."
me as though he knew me?"
"No," said Danglars, "no, decidedly no; keep my signatures.
But you know none are so formal as bankers in transacting
business; I intended this money for the charity fund, and I
seemed to be robbing them if I did not pay them with these
precise bonds. How absurd -- as if one crown were not as
good as another. Excuse me;" and he began to laugh loudly,
but nervously.

"Perhaps he knows you, though you do not know him; M. de
Monte Cristo knows everybody."

"But," said Danglars, "there is still a sum of one hundred
thousand francs?"

"It is really true," said M. de Boville.

"Oh, a mere nothing," said Monte Cristo. "The balance would
come to about that sum; but keep it, and we shall be quits."

"Yes, I once had business to transact with it to the amount of
200,000 francs; but since then I have not heard it mentioned."

"Count." said Danglars, "are you speaking seriously?"

"It is one of the best houses in Europe," said Danglars,
carelessly throwing down the receipt on his desk.

"Five millions!"
"Here is his receipt. Believe your own eyes." M. de Boville
took the paper Danglars presented him, and read: --

"Received of Baron Danglars the sum of five million one
"Certainly, I excuse you," said Monte Cristo graciously, "and hundred thousand francs, to be repaid on demand by the
house of Thomson & French of Rome."
pocket them." And he placed the bonds in his pocket-book.

"I never joke with bankers," said Monte Cristo in a freezing
manner, which repelled impertinence; and he turned to the
door, just as the valet de chambre announced, -- "M. de
Boville, receiver-general of the charities."

"Do you know the house of Thomson & French?"

"And he had five millions in your hands alone! Why, this
Count of Monte Cristo must be a nabob?"

"Indeed I do not know what he is; he has three unlimited
"Ma foi," said Monte Cristo; "I think I arrived just in time to credits -- one on me, one on Rothschild, one on Lafitte; and,
obtain your signatures, or they would have been disputed you see," he added carelessly, "he has given me the
with me."
preference, by leaving a balance of 100,000 francs." M. de
Danglars again became pale, and hastened to conduct the Boville manifested signs of extraordinary admiration. "I
count out. Monte Cristo exchanged a ceremonious bow with must visit him," he said, "and obtain some pious grant from
M. de Boville, who was standing in the waiting-room, and him."
who was introduced into Danglars' room as soon as the "Oh, you may make sure of him; his charities alone amount
count had left. The count's sad face was illumined by a faint to 20,000 francs a month."
smile, as he noticed the portfolio which the receiver-general
held in his hand. At the door he found his carriage, and was "It is magnificent! I will set before him the example of
immediately driven to the bank. Meanwhile Danglars, Madame de Morcerf and her son."
repressing all emotion, advanced to meet the "What example?"
receiver-general. We need not say that a smile of
"They gave all their fortune to the hospitals."
condescension was stamped upon his lips. "Good-morning,
creditor," said he; "for I wager anything it is the creditor who "What fortune?"
visits me."
"Their own -- M. de Morcerf's, who is deceased."
"You are right, baron," answered M. de Boville; "the charities "For what reason?"
present themselves to you through me: the widows and
orphans depute me to receive alms to the amount of five "Because they would not spend money so guiltily acquired."
millions from you."
"And what are they to live upon?"
"And yet they say orphans are to be pitied," said Danglars,
wishing to prolong the jest. "Poor things!"

"The mother retires into the country, and the son enters the
army."

"Here I am in their name," said M. de Boville; "but did you "Well, I must confess, these are scruples."
receive my letter yesterday?"
"I registered their deed of gift yesterday."
"Yes."
"And how much did they possess?"
"I have brought my receipt."
"Oh, not much -- from twelve to thirteen hundred thousand
"My dear M. de Boville, your widows and orphans must francs. But to return to our millions."
oblige me by waiting twenty-four hours, since M. de Monte
"Certainly," said Danglars, in the most natural tone in the
Cristo whom you just saw leaving here -- you did see him, I
world. "Are you then pressed for this money?"
think?"
"Yes; for the examination of our cash takes place to-morrow."
"Yes; well?"
"To-morrow? Why did you not tell me so before? Why, it is
"Well, M. de Monte Cristo has just carried off their five
as good as a century! At what hour does the examination
millions."
take place?"
"How so?"
"At two o'clock."
"The count has an unlimited credit upon me; a credit opened
"Send at twelve," said Danglars, smiling. M. de Boville said
by Thomson & French, of Rome; he came to demand five
nothing, but nodded his head, and took up the portfolio.
millions at once, which I paid him with checks on the bank.
"Now I think of it, you can do better," said Danglars.
My funds are deposited there, and you can understand that
if I draw out ten millions on the same day it will appear "How do you mean?"
rather strange to the governor. Two days will be a different
"The receipt of M. de Monte Cristo is as good as money; take
thing," said Danglars, smiling.
it to Rothschild's or Lafitte's, and they will take it off your
413


CHAPTER 104 DANGLARS SIGNATURE

hands at once."
"What, though payable at Rome?"

"Everybody pities you, sir; and, above all, Mademoiselle
Danglars!"

"Poor Eugenie!" said Danglars; "do you know she is going to
"Certainly; it will only cost you a discount of 5,000 or 6,000
embrace a religious life?"
francs." The receiver started back. "Ma foi," he said, "I prefer
waiting till to-morrow. What a proposition!"
"No."
"I thought, perhaps," said Danglars with supreme
impertinence, "that you had a deficiency to make up?"
"Indeed," said the receiver.
"And if that were the case it would be worth while to make
some sacrifice."
"Thank you, no, sir "
"Then it will be to-morrow."
"Yes; but without fail."
"Ah, you are laughing at me; send to-morrow at twelve, and
the bank shall be notified."
"I will come myself."

"Alas, it is unhappily but too true. The day after the event,
she decided on leaving Paris with a nun of her acquaintance;
they are gone to seek a very strict convent in Italy or Spain."
"Oh, it is terrible!" and M. de Boville retired with this
exclamation, after expressing acute sympathy with the father.
But he had scarcely left before Danglars, with an energy of
action those can alone understand who have seen Robert
Macaire represented by Frederic,* exclaimed, -- "Fool!" Then
enclosing Monte Cristo's receipt in a little pocket-book, he
added: -- "Yes, come at twelve o'clock; I shall then be far
away." Then he double-locked his door, emptied all his
drawers, collected about fifty thousand francs in bank-notes,
burned several papers, left others exposed to view, and then
commenced writing a letter which he addressed:

"Better still, since it will afford me the pleasure of seeing
"To Madame la Baronne Danglars."
you." They shook hands. "By the way," said M. de Boville,
"are you not going to the funeral of poor Mademoiselle de * Frederic Lemaitre -- French actor (1800-1876). Robert
Macaire is the hero of two favorite melodramas -- "Chien de
Villefort, which I met on my road here?"
Montargis" and "Chien d'Aubry" -- and the name is applied
"No," said the banker; "I have appeared rather ridiculous
to bold criminals as a term of derision.
since that affair of Benedetto, so I remain in the background."
"I will place it on her table myself to-night," he murmured.
"Bah, you are wrong. How were you to blame in that affair?"
Then taking a passport from his drawer he said, -- "Good, it
"Listen -- when one bears an irreproachable name, as I do, is available for two months longer."
one is rather sensitive."

414


Chapter 105 The Cemetery Of Pere-La-Chaise

M

. de Boville had indeed met the funeral procession
which was taking Valentine to her last home on earth.
The weather was dull and stormy, a cold wind shook the few
remaining yellow leaves from the boughs of the trees, and
scattered them among the crowd which filled the boulevards.
M. de Villefort, a true Parisian, considered the cemetery of
Pere-la-Chaise alone worthy of receiving the mortal remains
of a Parisian family; there alone the corpses belonging to him
would be surrounded by worthy associates. He had
therefore purchased a vault, which was quickly occupied by
members of his family. On the front of the monument was
inscribed: "The families of Saint-Meran and Villefort," for
such had been the last wish expressed by poor Renee,
Valentine's mother. The pompous procession therefore
wended its way towards Pere-la-Chaise from the Faubourg
Saint-Honore. Having crossed Paris, it passed through the
Faubourg du Temple, then leaving the exterior boulevards, it
reached the cemetery. More than fifty private carriages
followed the twenty mourning-coaches, and behind them
more than five hundred persons joined in the procession on
foot.
These last consisted of all the young people whom
Valentine's death had struck like a thunderbolt, and who,
notwithstanding the raw chilliness of the season, could not
refrain from paying a last tribute to the memory of the
beautiful, chaste, and adorable girl, thus cut off in the flower
of her youth. As they left Paris, an equipage with four horses,
at full speed, was seen to draw up suddenly; it contained
Monte Cristo. The count left the carriage and mingled in the
crowd who followed on foot. Chateau-Renaud perceived
him and immediately alighting from his coupe, joined him.
The count looked attentively through every opening in the
crowd; he was evidently watching for some one, but his
search ended in disappointment. "Where is Morrel?" he
asked; "do either of these gentlemen know where he is?"
"We
have
already
asked
that
question,"
said
Chateau-Renaud, "for none of us has seen him." The count
was silent, but continued to gaze around him. At length they
arrived at the cemetery. The piercing eye of Monte Cristo
glanced through clusters of bushes and trees, and was soon
relieved from all anxiety, for seeing a shadow glide between
the yew-trees, Monte Cristo recognized him whom he
sought. One funeral is generally very much like another in
this magnificent metropolis. Black figures are seen scattered
over the long white avenues; the silence of earth and heaven
is alone broken by the noise made by the crackling branches
of hedges planted around the monuments; then follows the
melancholy chant of the priests, mingled now and then with
a sob of anguish, escaping from some woman concealed
behind a mass of flowers.

crushing his hat between his fingers, leaned against a tree,
situated on an elevation commanding the mausoleum, so
that none of the funeral details could escape his observation.
Everything was conducted in the usual manner. A few men,
the least impressed of all by the scene, pronounced a
discourse, some deploring this premature death, others
expatiating on the grief of the father, and one very ingenious
person quoting the fact that Valentine had solicited pardon
of her father for criminals on whom the arm of justice was
ready to fall -- until at length they exhausted their stores of
metaphor and mournful speeches.
Monte Cristo heard and saw nothing, or rather he only saw
Morrel, whose calmness had a frightful effect on those who
knew what was passing in his heart. "See," said Beauchamp,
pointing out Morrel to Debray. "What is he doing up there?"
And they called Chateau-Renaud's attention to him.
"How pale he is!" said Chateau-Renaud, shuddering.
"He is cold," said Debray.
"Not at all," said Chateau-Renaud, slowly; "I think he is
violently agitated. He is very susceptible."
"Bah," said Debray; "he scarcely knew Mademoiselle de
Villefort; you said so yourself."
"True. Still I remember he danced three times with her at
Madame de Morcerf's. Do you recollect that ball, count,
where you produced such an effect?"
"No, I do not," replied Monte Cristo, without even knowing
of what or to whom he was speaking, so much was he
occupied in watching Morrel, who was holding his breath
with emotion. "The discourse is over; farewell, gentlemen,"
said the count. And he disappeared without anyone seeing
whither he went. The funeral being over, the guests returned
to Paris. Chateau-Renaud looked for a moment for Morrel;
but while they were watching the departure of the count,
Morrel had quitted his post, and Chateau-Renaud, failing in
his search, joined Debray and Beauchamp.

Monte Cristo concealed himself behind a large tomb and
awaited the arrival of Morrel, who by degrees approached
the tomb now abandoned by spectators and workmen.
Morrel threw a glance around, but before it reached the spot
occupied by Monte Cristo the latter had advanced yet nearer,
still unperceived. The young man knelt down. The count,
with outstretched neck and glaring eyes, stood in an attitude
ready to pounce upon Morrel upon the first occasion. Morrel
bent his head till it touched the stone, then clutching the
grating with both hands, he murmured, -- "Oh, Valentine!"
The count's heart was pierced by the utterance of these two
words; he stepped forward, and touching the young man's
shoulder, said, -- "I was looking for you, my friend." Monte
The shadow Monte Cristo had noticed passed rapidly Cristo expected a burst of passion, but he was deceived, for
behind the tomb of Abelard and Heloise, placed itself close Morrel turning round, said calmly, -to the heads of the horses belonging to the hearse, and "You see I was praying." The scrutinizing glance of the count
following the undertaker's men, arrived with them at the searched the young man from head to foot. He then seemed
spot appointed for the burial. Each person's attention was more easy.
occupied. Monte Cristo saw nothing but the shadow, which
"Shall I drive you back to Paris?" he asked.
no one else observed. Twice the count left the ranks to see
whether the object of his interest had any concealed weapon "No, thank you."
beneath his clothes. When the procession stopped, this "Do you wish anything?"
shadow was recognized as Morrel, who, with his coat
buttoned up to his throat, his face livid, and convulsively "Leave me to pray." The count withdrew without opposition,
415


CHAPTER 105 THE CEMETERY OF PERE-LA-CHAISE

but it was only to place himself in a situation where he could
watch every movement of Morrel, who at length arose,
brushed the dust from his knees, and turned towards Paris,
without once looking back. He walked slowly down the Rue
de la Roquette. The count, dismissing his carriage, followed
him about a hundred paces behind. Maximilian crossed the
canal and entered the Rue Meslay by the boulevards. Five
minutes after the door had been closed on Morrel's entrance,
it was again opened for the count. Julie was at the entrance
of the garden, where she was attentively watching Penelon,
who, entering with zeal into his profession of gardener, was
very busy grafting some Bengal roses. "Ah, count," she
exclaimed, with the delight manifested by every member of
the family whenever he visited the Rue Meslay.

your desk," said Monte Cristo, pointing with his finger to the
pistols on the table.

was manifested by a bright color which seldom appeared on
the face of that imperturbable man.

Morrel rushed forward to tear it from him, but Monte Cristo
perceiving his intention, seized his wrist with his iron grasp.
"You wish to destroy yourself," said the count; "you have
written it."

"I am on the point of starting on a journey," replied Morrel
disdainfully.
"My friend," exclaimed Monte Cristo in a tone of exquisite
sweetness.
"Sir?"
"My friend, my dear Maximilian, do not make a hasty
resolution, I entreat you."
"I make a hasty resolution?" said Morrel, shrugging his
shoulders; "is there anything extraordinary in a journey?"

"Maximilian," said the count, "let us both lay aside the mask
"Maximilian has just returned, has he not, madame?" asked we have assumed. You no more deceive me with that false
the count.
calmness than I impose upon you with my frivolous
solicitude. You can understand, can you not, that to have
"Yes, I think I saw him pass; but pray, call Emmanuel."
acted as I have done, to have broken that glass, to have
"Excuse me, madame, but I must go up to Maximilian's room intruded on the solitude of a friend -- you can understand
this instant," replied Monte Cristo, "I have something of the that, to have done all this, I must have been actuated by real
greatest importance to tell him."
uneasiness, or rather by a terrible conviction. Morrel, you are
"Go, then," she said with a charming smile, which going to destroy yourself!"
accompanied him until he had disappeared. Monte Cristo "Indeed, count," said Morrel, shuddering; "what has put this
soon ran up the staircase conducting from the ground-floor into your head?"
to Maximilian's room; when he reached the landing he
listened attentively, but all was still. Like many old houses "I tell you that you are about to destroy yourself," continued
occupied by a single family, the room door was panelled the count, "and here is proof of what I say;" and,
with glass; but it was locked, Maximilian was shut in, and it approaching the desk, he removed the sheet of paper which
was impossible to see what was passing in the room, because Morrel had placed over the letter he had begun, and took the
a red curtain was drawn before the glass. The count's anxiety latter in his hands.

"What shall I do!" he uttered, and reflected for a moment;
"shall I ring? No, the sound of a bell, announcing a visitor,
will but accelerate the resolution of one in Maximilian's
situation, and then the bell would be followed by a louder
noise." Monte Cristo trembled from head to foot and as if his
determination had been taken with the rapidity of lightning,
he struck one of the panes of glass with his elbow; the glass
was shivered to atoms, then withdrawing the curtain he saw
Morrel, who had been writing at his desk, bound from his
seat at the noise of the broken window.
"I beg a thousand pardons," said the count, "there is nothing
the matter, but I slipped down and broke one of your panes
of glass with my elbow. Since it is opened, I will take
advantage of it to enter your room; do not disturb yourself -do not disturb yourself!" And passing his hand through the
broken glass, the count opened the door. Morrel, evidently
discomposed, came to meet Monte Cristo less with the
intention of receiving him than to exclude his entry. "Ma foi,"
said Monte Cristo, rubbing his elbow, "it's all your servant's
fault; your stairs are so polished, it is like walking on glass."
"Are you hurt, sir?" coldly asked Morrel.
"I believe not. But what are you about there? You were
writing."
"I?"
"Your fingers are stained with ink."

"Well," said Morrel, changing his expression of calmness for
one of violence -- "well, and if I do intend to turn this pistol
against myself, who shall prevent me -- who will dare
prevent me? All my hopes are blighted, my heart is broken,
my life a burden, everything around me is sad and mournful;
earth has become distasteful to me, and human voices
distract me. It is a mercy to let me die, for if I live I shall lose
my reason and become mad. When, sir, I tell you all this
with tears of heartfelt anguish, can you reply that I am
wrong, can you prevent my putting an end to my miserable
existence? Tell me, sir, could you have the courage to do so?"
"Yes, Morrel," said Monte Cristo, with a calmness which
contrasted strangely with the young man's excitement; "yes,
I would do so."
"You?" exclaimed Morrel, with increasing anger and
reproach -- "you, who have deceived me with false hopes,
who have cheered and soothed me with vain promises,
when I might, if not have saved her, at least have seen her
die in my arms! You, who pretend to understand everything,
even the hidden sources of knowledge, -- and who enact the
part of a guardian angel upon earth, and could not even find
an antidote to a poison administered to a young girl! Ah, sir,
indeed you would inspire me with pity, were you not
hateful in my eyes."

"Ah, true, I was writing. I do sometimes, soldier though I "Morrel" -am."
"Yes; you tell me to lay aside the mask, and I will do so, be
Monte Cristo advanced into the room; Maximilian was satisfied! When you spoke to me at the cemetery, I answered
obliged to let him pass, but he followed him. "You were you -- my heart was softened; when you arrived here, I
allowed you to enter. But since you abuse my confidence,
writing?" said Monte Cristo with a searching look.
since you have devised a new torture after I thought I had
"I have already had the honor of telling you I was," said
exhausted them all, then, Count of Monte Cristo my
Morrel.
pretended benefactor -- then, Count of Monte Cristo, the
The count looked around him. "Your pistols are beside universal guardian, be satisfied, you shall witness the death
416

of your friend;" and Morrel, with a maniacal laugh, again
rushed towards the pistols.

a low voice, pressing Emmanuel's hand significantly, "Watch
over him."

"And I again repeat, you shall not commit suicide."

"Why so?" asked the young man, surprised.

"Prevent me, then!" replied Morrel, with another struggle,
which, like the first, failed in releasing him from the count's
iron grasp.

"I cannot explain myself; but watch over him." Emmanuel
looked around the room and caught sight of the pistols; his
eyes rested on the weapons, and he pointed to them. Monte
Cristo bent his head. Emmanuel went towards the pistols.
"Leave them," said Monte Cristo. Then walking towards
Morrel, he took his hand; the tumultuous agitation of the
young man was succeeded by a profound stupor. Julie
returned, holding the silken purse in her hands, while tears
of joy rolled down her cheeks, like dewdrops on the rose.

"I will prevent you."
"And who are you, then, that arrogate to yourself this
tyrannical right over free and rational beings?"
"Who am I?" repeated Monte Cristo. "Listen; I am the only
man in the world having the right to say to you, `Morrel,
your father's son shall not die to-day;'" and Monte Cristo,
with an expression of majesty and sublimity, advanced with
arms folded toward the young man, who, involuntarily
overcome by the commanding manner of this man, recoiled
a step.
"Why do you mention my father?" stammered he; "why do
you mingle a recollection of him with the affairs of today?"
"Because I am he who saved your father's life when he
wished to destroy himself, as you do to-day -- because I am
the man who sent the purse to your young sister, and the
Pharaon to old Morrel -- because I am the Edmond Dantes
who nursed you, a child, on my knees." Morrel made
another step back, staggering, breathless, crushed; then all
his strength give way, and he fell prostrate at the feet of
Monte Cristo. Then his admirable nature underwent a
complete and sudden revulsion; he arose, rushed out of the
room and to the stairs, exclaiming energetically, "Julie, Julie
-- Emmanuel, Emmanuel!"
Monte Cristo endeavored also to leave, but Maximilian
would have died rather than relax his hold of the handle of
the door, which he closed upon the count. Julie, Emmanuel,
and some of the servants, ran up in alarm on hearing the
cries of Maximilian. Morrel seized their hands, and opening
the door exclaimed in a voice choked with sobs, "On your
knees -- on your knees -- he is our benefactor -- the saviour
of our father! He is" -He would have added "Edmond Dantes," but the count
seized his arm and prevented him. Julie threw herself into
the arms of the count; Emmanuel embraced him as a
guardian angel; Morrel again fell on his knees, and struck
the ground with his forehead. Then the iron-hearted man felt
his heart swell in his breast; a flame seemed to rush from his
throat to his eyes, he bent his head and wept. For a while
nothing was heard in the room but a succession of sobs,
while the incense from their grateful hearts mounted to
heaven. Julie had scarcely recovered from her deep emotion
when she rushed out of the room, descended to the next
floor, ran into the drawing-room with childlike joy and
raised the crystal globe which covered the purse given by
the unknown of the Allees de Meillan. Meanwhile,
Emmanuel in a broken voice said to the count, "Oh, count,
how could you, hearing us so often speak of our unknown
benefactor, seeing us pay such homage of gratitude and
adoration to his memory, -- how could you continue so long
without discovering yourself to us? Oh, it was cruel to us,
and -- dare I say it? -- to you also."

"Here is the relic," she said; "do not think it will be less dear
to us now we are acquainted with our benefactor!"
"My child," said Monte Cristo, coloring, "allow me to take
back that purse? Since you now know my face, I wish to be
remembered alone through the affection I hope you will
grant me.
"Oh," said Julie, pressing the purse to her heart, "no, no, I
beseech you do not take it, for some unhappy day you will
leave us, will you not?"
"You have guessed rightly, madame," replied Monte Cristo,
smiling; "in a week I shall have left this country, where so
many persons who merit the vengeance of heaven lived
happily, while my father perished of hunger and grief."
While announcing his departure, the count fixed his eyes on
Morrel, and remarked that the words, "I shall have left this
country," had failed to rouse him from his lethargy. He then
saw that he must make another struggle against the grief of
his friend, and taking the hands of Emmanuel and Julie,
which he pressed within his own, he said with the mild
authority of a father, "My kind friends, leave me alone with
Maximilian." Julie saw the means offered of carrying off her
precious relic, which Monte Cristo had forgotten. She drew
her husband to the door. "Let us leave them," she said. The
count was alone with Morrel, who remained motionless as a
statue.
"Come," said Monte-Cristo, touching his shoulder with his
finger, "are you a man again, Maximilian?"
"Yes; for I begin to suffer again."
The count frowned, apparently in gloomy hesitation.
"Maximilian, Maximilian," he said, "the ideas you yield to are
unworthy of a Christian."
"Oh, do not fear, my friend," said Morrel, raising his head,
and smiling with a sweet expression on the count; "I shall no
longer attempt my life."
"Then we are to have no more pistols -- no more despair?"
"No; I have found a better remedy for my grief than either a
bullet or a knife."
"Poor fellow, what is it?"
"My grief will kill me of itself."

"My friend," said Monte Cristo, with an expression of
melancholy equal to his own, "listen to me. One day, in a
moment of despair like yours, since it led to a similar
resolution, I also wished to kill myself; one day your father,
"Listen, my friends," said the count -- "I may call you so since
equally desperate, wished to kill himself too. If any one had
we have really been friends for the last eleven years -- the
said to your father, at the moment he raised the pistol to his
discovery of this secret has been occasioned by a great event
head -- if any one had told me, when in my prison I pushed
which you must never know. I wish to bury it during my
back the food I had not tasted for three days -- if anyone had
whole life in my own bosom, but your brother Maximilian
said to either of us then, `Live -- the day will come when you
wrested it from me by a violence he repents of now, I am
will be happy, and will bless life!' -- no matter whose voice
sure." Then turning around, and seeing that Morrel, still on
had spoken, we should have heard him with the smile of
his knees, had thrown himself into an arm-chair, be added in
doubt, or the anguish of incredulity, -- and yet how many
417


CHAPTER 105 THE CEMETERY OF PERE-LA-CHAISE

times has your father blessed life while embracing you -- You think the result of this blow has been to produce an
how often have I myself" -ordinary grief, and you would cure it by an ordinary remedy
-- change of scene." And Morrel dropped his head with
"Ah," exclaimed Morrel, interrupting the count, "you had
disdainful incredulity. "What can I say more?" asked Monte
only lost your liberty, my father had only lost his fortune,
Cristo. "I have confidence in the remedy I propose, and only
but I have lost Valentine."
ask you to permit me to assure you of its efficacy."
"Look at me," said Monte Cristo, with that expression which
"Count, you prolong my agony."
sometimes made him so eloquent and persuasive -- "look at
me. There are no tears in my eyes, nor is there fever in my "Then," said the count, "your feeble spirit will not even grant
veins, yet I see you suffer -- you, Maximilian, whom I love as me the trial I request? Come -- do you know of what the
my own son. Well, does not this tell you that in grief, as in Count of Monte Cristo is capable? do you know that he
life, there is always something to look forward to beyond? holds terrestrial beings under his control? nay, that he can
Now, if I entreat, if I order you to live, Morrel, it is in the almost work a miracle? Well, wait for the miracle I hope to
conviction that one day you will thank me for having accomplish, or" -preserved your life."
"Or?" repeated Morrel.
"Oh, heavens," said the young man, "oh, heavens -- what are
"Or, take care, Morrel, lest I call you ungrateful."
you saying, count? Take care. But perhaps you have never
"Have pity on me, count!"
loved!"
"Child!" replied the count.
"I mean, as I love. You see, I have been a soldier ever since I
attained manhood. I reached the age of twenty-nine without
loving, for none of the feelings I before then experienced
merit the apellation of love. Well, at twenty-nine I saw
Valentine; for two years I have loved her, for two years I
have seen written in her heart, as in a book, all the virtues of
a daughter and wife. Count, to possess Valentine would
have been a happiness too infinite, too ecstatic, too complete,
too divine for this world, since it has been denied me; but
without Valentine the earth is desolate."

"I feel so much pity towards you, Maximilian, that -- listen to
me attentively -- if I do not cure you in a month, to the day,
to the very hour, mark my words, Morrel, I will place loaded
pistols before you, and a cup of the deadliest Italian poison -a poison more sure and prompt than that which has killed
Valentine."
"Will you promise me?"
"Yes; for I am a man, and have suffered like yourself, and
also contemplated suicide; indeed, often since misfortune
has left me I have longed for the delights of an eternal sleep."

"But you are sure you will promise me this?" said Morrel,
intoxicated. "I not only promise, but swear it!" said Monte
"Then have a care, I repeat, for you seek to persuade me, and Cristo extending his hand.
if you succeed I should lose my reason, for I should hope "In a month, then, on your honor, if I am not consoled, you
that I could again behold Valentine." The count smiled. "My will let me take my life into my own hands, and whatever
friend, my father," said Morrel with excitement, "have a care, may happen you will not call me ungrateful?"
I again repeat, for the power you wield over me alarms me.
Weigh your words before you speak, for my eyes have "In a month, to the day, the very hour and the date are
already become brighter, and my heart beats strongly; be sacred, Maximilian. I do not know whether you remember
cautious, or you will make me believe in supernatural that this is the 5th of September; it is ten years to-day since I
agencies. I must obey you, though you bade me call forth the saved your father's life, who wished to die." Morrel seized
the count's hand and kissed it; the count allowed him to pay
dead or walk upon the water."
the homage he felt due to him. "In a month you will find on
"Hope, my friend," repeated the count.
the table, at which we shall be then sitting, good pistols and
"Ah," said Morrel, falling from the height of excitement to a delicious draught; but, on the other hand, you must
the abyss of despair -- "ah, you are playing with me, like promise me not to attempt your life before that time."
those good, or rather selfish mothers who soothe their "Oh, I also swear it!" Monte Cristo drew the young man
children with honeyed words, because their screams annoy towards him, and pressed him for some time to his heart.
them. No, my friend, I was wrong to caution you; do not fear, "And now," he said, "after to-day, you will come and live
I will bury my grief so deep in my heart, I will disguise it so, with me; you can occupy Haidee's apartment, and my
that you shall not even care to sympathize with me. Adieu, daughter will at least be replaced by my son."
my friend, adieu!"
"Haidee?" said Morrel, "what has become of her?"
"On the contrary," said the count, "after this time you must
live with me -- you must not leave me, and in a week we "She departed last night."
shall have left France behind us."
"To leave you?"
"I have told you to hope," said the count.

"And you still bid me hope?"
"I tell you to hope, because I have a method of curing you."
"Count, you render me sadder than before, if it be possible.

418

"To wait for me. Hold yourself ready then to join me at the
Champs Elysees, and lead me out of this house without any
one seeing my departure." Maximilian hung his head, and
obeyed with childlike reverence.


Chapter 106 Dividing The Proceeds

T

he apartment on the second floor of the house in the Rue
Saint-Germain-des-Pres, where Albert de Morcerf had
selected a home for his mother, was let to a very mysterious
person. This was a man whose face the concierge himself
had never seen, for in the winter his chin was buried in one
of the large red handkerchiefs worn by gentlemen's
coachmen on a cold night, and in the summer he made a
point of always blowing his nose just as he approached the
door. Contrary to custom, this gentleman had not been
watched, for as the report ran that he was a person of high
rank, and one who would allow no impertinent interference,
his incognito was strictly respected.
His visits were tolerably regular, though occasionally he
appeared a little before or after his time, but generally, both
in summer and winter, he took possession of his apartment
about four o'clock, though he never spent the night there. At
half-past three in the winter the fire was lighted by the
discreet servant, who had the superintendence of the little
apartment, and in the summer ices were placed on the table
at the same hour. At four o'clock, as we have already stated,
the mysterious personage arrived. Twenty minutes
afterwards a carriage stopped at the house, a lady alighted in
a black or dark blue dress, and always thickly veiled; she
passed like a shadow through the lodge, and ran up-stairs
without a sound escaping under the touch of her light foot.
No one ever asked her where she was going. Her face,
therefore, like that of the gentleman, was perfectly unknown
to the two concierges, who were perhaps unequalled
throughout the capital for discretion. We need not say she
stopped at the second floor. Then she tapped in a peculiar
manner at a door, which after being opened to admit her
was again fastened, and curiosity penetrated no farther.
They used the same precautions in leaving as in entering the
house. The lady always left first, and as soon as she had
stepped into her carriage, it drove away, sometimes towards
the right hand, sometimes to the left; then about twenty
minutes afterwards the gentleman would also leave, buried
in his cravat or concealed by his handkerchief.
The day after Monte Cristo had called upon Danglars, the
mysterious lodger entered at ten o'clock in the morning
instead of four in the afternoon. Almost directly afterwards,
without the usual interval of time, a cab arrived, and the
veiled lady ran hastily up-stairs. The door opened, but
before it could be closed, the lady exclaimed: "Oh, Lucien -oh, my friend!" The concierge therefore heard for the first
time that the lodger's name was Lucien; still, as he was the
very perfection of a door-keeper, he made up his mind not to
tell his wife. "Well, what is the matter, my dear?" asked the
gentleman whose name the lady's agitation revealed; "tell me
what is the matter."
"Oh, Lucien, can I confide in you?"
"Of course, you know you can do so. But what can be the
matter? Your note of this morning has completely
bewildered me. This precipitation -- this unusual
appointment. Come, ease me of my anxiety, or else frighten
me at once."
"Lucien, a great event has happened!" said the lady, glancing
inquiringly at Lucien, -- "M. Danglars left last night!"
"Left? -- M. Danglars left? Where has he gone?"
"I do not know."

"What do you mean? Has he gone intending not to return?"
"Undoubtedly; -- at ten o'clock at night his horses took him
to the barrier of Charenton; there a post-chaise was waiting
for him -- he entered it with his valet de chambre, saying that
he was going to Fontainebleau."
"Then what did you mean" -"Stay -- he left a letter for me."
"A letter?"
"Yes; read it." And the baroness took from her pocket a letter
which she gave to Debray. Debray paused a moment before
reading, as if trying to guess its contents, or perhaps while
making up his mind how to act, whatever it might contain.
No doubt his ideas were arranged in a few minutes, for he
began reading the letter which caused so much uneasiness in
the heart of the baroness, and which ran as follows: -"Madame and most faithful wife."
Debray mechanically stopped and looked at the baroness,
whose face became covered with blushes. "Read," she said.
Debray continued: -"When you receive this, you will no longer have a husband.
Oh, you need not be alarmed, you will only have lost him as
you have lost your daughter; I mean that I shall be travelling
on one of the thirty or forty roads leading out of France. I
owe you some explanations for my conduct, and as you are a
woman that can perfectly understand me, I will give them.
Listen, then. I received this morning five millions which I
paid away; almost directly afterwards another demand for
the same sum was presented to me; I put this creditor off till
to-morrow and I intend leaving to-day, to escape that
to-morrow, which would be rather too unpleasant for me to
endure. You understand this, do you not, my most precious
wife? I say you understand this, because you are as
conversant with my affairs as I am; indeed, I think you
understand them better, since I am ignorant of what has
become of a considerable portion of my fortune, once very
tolerable, while I am sure, madame, that you know perfectly
well. For women have infallible instincts; they can even
explain the marvellous by an algebraic calculation they have
invented; but I, who only understand my own figures, know
nothing more than that one day these figures deceived me.
Have you admired the rapidity of my fall? Have you been
slightly dazzled at the sudden fusion of my ingots? I confess
I have seen nothing but the fire; let us hope you have found
some gold among the ashes. With this consoling idea, I leave
you, madame, and most prudent wife, without any
conscientious reproach for abandoning you; you have
friends left, and the ashes I have already mentioned, and
above all the liberty I hasten to restore to you. And here,
madame, I must add another word of explanation. So long as
I hoped you were working for the good of our house and for
the fortune of our daughter, I philosophically closed my eyes;
but as you have transformed that house into a vast ruin I will
not be the foundation of another man's fortune. You were
rich when I married you, but little respected. Excuse me for
speaking so very candidly, but as this is intended only for
ourselves, I do not see why I should weigh my words. I have
augmented our fortune, and it has continued to increase
during the last fifteen years, till extraordinary and
unexpected catastrophes have suddenly overturned it, -419


CHAPTER 106 DIVIDING THE PROCEEDS

without any fault of mine, I can honestly declare. You,
madame, have only sought to increase your own, and I am
convinced that you have succeeded. I leave you, therefore, as
I took you, -- rich, but little respected. Adieu! I also intend
from this time to work on my own account. Accept my
acknowledgments for the example you have set me, and
which I intend following.

You are right, sir, and no one can doubt my position." These
were the only words that this proud and violently
enamoured woman could utter in response to Debray.

"Oh, madame, do not think that!"

"But," said the baroness, "I thought you never put the money
out to interest."

"But then you are rich, -- very rich, indeed," continued
Debray, taking out some papers from his pocket-book, which
he spread upon the table. Madame Danglars did not see
them; she was engaged in stilling the beatings of her heart,
"Your very devoted husband,
and restraining the tears which were ready to gush forth. At
length a sense of dignity prevailed, and if she did not
"Baron Danglars."
entirely master her agitation, she at least succeeded in
The baroness had watched Debray while he read this long preventing the fall of a single tear. "Madame," said Debray,
and painful letter, and saw him, notwithstanding his "it is nearly six months since we have been associated. You
self-control, change color once or twice. When he had ended furnished a principal of 100,000 francs. Our partnership
the perusal, he folded the letter and resumed his pensive began in the month of April. In May we commenced
attitude. "Well?" asked Madame Danglars, with an anxiety operations, and in the course of the month gained 450,000
easy to be understood.
francs. In June the profit amounted to 900,000. In July we
added 1,700,000 francs, -- it was, you know, the month of the
"Well, madame?" unhesitatingly repeated Debray.
Spanish bonds. In August we lost 300,000 francs at the
"With what ideas does that letter inspire you?"
beginning of the month, but on the 13th we made up for it,
"Oh, it is simple enough, madame; it inspires me with the and we now find that our accounts, reckoning from the first
day of partnership up to yesterday, when I closed them,
idea that M. Danglars has left suspiciously."
showed a capital of 2,400,000 francs, that is, 1,200,000 for
"Certainly; but is this all you have to say to me?"
each of us. Now, madame," said Debray, delivering up his
"I do not understand you," said Debray with freezing accounts in the methodical manner of a stockbroker, "there
coldness.
are still 80,000 francs, the interest of this money, in my
hands."
"He is gone! Gone, never to return!"
"I tell you he will never return. I know his character; he is
inflexible in any resolutions formed for his own interests. If
he could have made any use of me, he would have taken me
with him; he leaves me in Paris, as our separation will
conduce to his benefit; -- therefore he has gone, and I am free
forever," added Madame Danglars, in the same supplicating
tone. Debray, instead of answering, allowed her to remain in
an attitude of nervous inquiry. "Well?" she said at length, "do
you not answer me?"
"I have but one question to ask you, -- what do you intend to
do?"
"I was going to ask you," replied the baroness with a beating
heart.
"Ah, then, you wish to ask advice of me?"
"Yes; I do wish to ask your advice," said Madame Danglars
with anxious expectation.

"Excuse me, madame," said Debray coldly, "I had your
permission to do so, and I have made use of it. There are,
then, 40,000 francs for your share, besides the 100,000 you
furnished me to begin with, making in all 1,340,000 francs for
your portion. Now, madame, I took the precaution of
drawing out your money the day before yesterday; it is not
long ago, you see, and I was in continual expectation of
being called on to deliver up my accounts. There is your
money, -- half in bank-notes, the other half in checks payable
to bearer. I say there, for as I did not consider my house safe
enough, or lawyers sufficiently discreet, and as landed
property carries evidence with it, and moreover since you
have no right to possess anything independent of your
husband, I have kept this sum, now your whole fortune, in a
chest concealed under that closet, and for greater security I
myself concealed it there.

"Now, madame," continued Debray, first opening the closet,
then the chest; -- "now, madame, here are 800 notes of 1,000
francs each, resembling, as you see, a large book bound in
iron; to this I add a certificate in the funds of 25,000 francs;
"To travel!" she murmured.
then, for the odd cash, making I think about 110,000 francs,
"Certainly; as M. Danglars says, you are rich, and perfectly here is a check upon my banker, who, not being M. Danglars,
free. In my opinion, a withdrawal from Paris is absolutely will pay you the amount, you may rest assured." Madame
necessary after the double catastrophe of Mademoiselle Danglars mechanically took the check, the bond, and the
Danglars' broken contract and M. Danglars' disappearance. heap of bank-notes. This enormous fortune made no great
The world will think you abandoned and poor, for the wife appearance on the table. Madame Danglars, with tearless
of a bankrupt would never be forgiven, were she to keep up eyes, but with her breast heaving with concealed emotion,
an appearance of opulence. You have only to remain in Paris placed the bank-notes in her bag, put the certificate and
for about a fortnight, telling the world you are abandoned, check into her pocket-book, and then, standing pale and
and relating the details of this desertion to your best friends, mute, awaited one kind word of consolation. But she waited
who will soon spread the report. Then you can quit your in vain.
house, leaving your jewels and giving up your jointure, and
every one's mouth will be filled with praises of your "Now, madame," said Debray, "you have a splendid fortune,
an income of about 60,000 livres a year, which is enormous
disinterestedness. They will know you are deserted, and
for a woman who cannot keep an establishment here for a
think you also poor, for I alone know your real financial
year, at least. You will be able to indulge all your fancies;
position, and am quite ready to give up my accounts as an
besides, should you find your income insufficient, you can,
honest partner." The dread with which the pale and
for the sake of the past, madame, make use of mine; and I am
motionless baroness listened to this, was equalled by the
ready to offer you all I possess, on loan."
calm indifference with which Debray had spoken.
"Deserted?" she repeated; "ah, yes, I am, indeed, deserted! "Thank you, sir -- thank you," replied the baroness; "you
"Then if you wish to take my advice," said the young man
coldly, "I would recommend you to travel."

420

forget that what you have just paid me is much more than a her eyes, seemed like "moonlight on a statue," -- yielding
poor woman requires, who intends for some time, at least, to light without warmth. Albert, too, was ill at ease; the
retire from the world."
remains of luxury prevented him from sinking into his
actual position. If he wished to go out without gloves, his
Debray was, for a moment, surprised, but immediately
hands appeared too white; if he wished to walk through the
recovering himself, he bowed with an air which seemed to
town, his boots seemed too highly polished. Yet these two
say, "As you please, madame."
noble and intelligent creatures, united by the indissoluble
Madame Danglars had until then, perhaps, hoped for ties of maternal and filial love, had succeeded in tacitly
something; but when she saw the careless bow of Debray, understanding one another, and economizing their stores,
and the glance by which it was accompanied, together with and Albert had been able to tell his mother without extorting
his significant silence, she raised her head, and without a change of countenance, -- "Mother, we have no more
passion or violence or even hesitation, ran down-stairs, money."
disdaining to address a last farewell to one who could thus
Mercedes had never known misery; she had often, in her
part from her. "Bah," said Debray, when she had left, "these
youth, spoken of poverty, but between want and necessity,
are fine projects! She will remain at home, read novels, and
those synonymous words, there is a wide difference.
speculate at cards, since she can no longer do so on the
Amongst the Catalans, Mercedes wished for a thousand
Bourse." Then taking up his account book, he cancelled with
things, but still she never really wanted any. So long as the
the greatest care all the entries of the amounts he had just
nets were good, they caught fish; and so long as they sold
paid away. "I have 1,060,000 francs remaining," he said.
their fish, they were able to buy twine for new nets. And
"What a pity Mademoiselle de Villefort is dead! She suited
then, shut out from friendship, having but one affection,
me in every respect, and I would have married her." And he
which could not be mixed up with her ordinary pursuits, she
calmly waited until the twenty minutes had elapsed after
thought of herself -- of no one but herself. Upon the little she
Madame Danglars' departure before he left the house.
earned she lived as well as she could; now there were two to
During this time he occupied himself in making figures, with
be supported, and nothing to live upon.
his watch by his side.
Winter approached. Mercedes had no fire in that cold and
Asmodeus -- that diabolical personage, who would have
naked room -- she, who was accustomed to stoves which
been created by every fertile imagination if Le Sage had not
heated the house from the hall to the boudoir; she had not
acquired the priority in his great masterpiece -- would have
even one little flower -- she whose apartment had been a
enjoyed a singular spectacle, if he had lifted up the roof of
conservatory of costly exotics. But she had her son. Hitherto
the little house in the Rue Saint-Germain-des-Pres, while
the excitement of fulfilling a duty had sustained them.
Debray was casting up his figures. Above the room in which
Excitement, like enthusiasm, sometimes renders us
Debray had been dividing two millions and a half with
unconscious to the things of earth. But the excitement had
Madame Danglars was another, inhabited by persons who
calmed down, and they felt themselves obliged to descend
have played too prominent a part in the incidents we have
from dreams to reality; after having exhausted the ideal, they
related for their appearance not to create some interest.
found they must talk of the actual.
Mercedes and Albert were in that room. Mercedes was much
changed within the last few days; not that even in her days "Mother," exclaimed Albert, just as Madame Danglars was
of fortune she had ever dressed with the magnificent display descending the stairs, "let us reckon our riches, if you please;
which makes us no longer able to recognize a woman when I want capital to build my plans upon."
she appears in a plain and simple attire; nor indeed, had she
"Capital -- nothing!" replied Mercedes with a mournful
fallen into that state of depression where it is impossible to
smile.
conceal the garb of misery; no, the change in Mercedes was
that her eye no longer sparkled, her lips no longer smiled, "No, mother, -- capital 3,000 francs. And I have an idea of
and there was now a hesitation in uttering the words which our leading a delightful life upon this 3,000 francs."
formerly sprang so fluently from her ready wit.
"Child!" sighed Mercedes.
It was not poverty which had broken her spirit; it was not a
want of courage which rendered her poverty burdensome.
Mercedes, although deposed from the exalted position she
had occupied, lost in the sphere she had now chosen, like a
person passing from a room splendidly lighted into utter
darkness, appeared like a queen, fallen from her palace to a
hovel, and who, reduced to strict necessity, could neither
become reconciled to the earthen vessels she was herself
forced to place upon the table, nor to the humble pallet
which had become her bed. The beautiful Catalane and
noble countess had lost both her proud glance and charming
smile, because she saw nothing but misery around her; the
walls were hung with one of the gray papers which
economical landlords choose as not likely to show the dirt;
the floor was uncarpeted; the furniture attracted the
attention to the poor attempt at luxury; indeed, everything
offended eyes accustomed to refinement and elegance.

"Alas, dear mother," said the young man, "I have unhappily
spent too much of your money not to know the value of it.
These 3,000 francs are enormous, and I intend building upon
this foundation a miraculous certainty for the future."
"You say this, my dear boy; but do you think we ought to
accept these 3,000 francs?" said Mercedes, coloring.
"I think so," answered Albert in a firm tone. "We will accept
them the more readily, since we have them not here; you
know they are buried in the garden of the little house in the
Allees de Meillan, at Marseilles. With 200 francs we can
reach Marseilles."
"With 200 francs? -- are you sure, Albert?"

"Oh, as for that, I have made inquiries respecting the
diligences and steamboats, and my calculations are made.
Madame de Morcerf had lived there since leaving her house; You will take your place in the coupe to Chalons. You see,
the continual silence of the spot oppressed her; still, seeing mother, I treat you handsomely for thirty-five francs." Albert
that Albert continually watched her countenance to judge then took a pen, and wrote: -the state of her feelings, she constrained herself to assume a Frs. Coupe, thirty-five francs
35
monotonous smile of the lips alone, which, contrasted with From Chalons to Lyons you will go on by the
the sweet and beaming expression that usually shone from steamboat -- six francs
6
421


CHAPTER 106 DIVIDING THE PROCEEDS

From Lyons to Avignon (still by steamboat),
sixteen francs
From Avignon to Marseilles, seven franc
Expenses on the road, about fifty francs
Total

16
7
50
114 Frs.

"Let us put down 120," added Albert, smiling. "You see I am
generous, am I not, mother?"
"But you, my poor child?"

"Are the half of the sum, mother; the other will be paid in a
year."
Mercedes raised her eyes to heaven with an expression it
would be impossible to describe, and tears, which had
hitherto been restrained, now yielded to her emotion, and
ran down her cheeks.
"The price of his blood!" she murmured.

"I? do you not see that I reserve eighty francs for myself? A
young man does not require luxuries; besides, I know what
travelling is."

"Yes, if I am killed," said Albert, laughing. "But I assure you,
mother, I have a strong intention of defending my person,
and I never felt half so strong an inclination to live as I do
now."

"With a post-chaise and valet de chambre?"

"Merciful heavens!"

"Any way, mother."

"Besides, mother, why should you make up your mind that I
am to be killed? Has Lamoriciere, that Ney of the South,
"Well, be it so. But these 200 francs?"
been killed? Has Changarnier been killed? Has Bedeau been
"Here they are, and 200 more besides. See, I have sold my killed? Has Morrel, whom we know, been killed? Think of
watch for 100 francs, and the guard and seals for 300. How your joy, mother, when you see me return with an
fortunate that the ornaments were worth more than the embroidered uniform! I declare, I expect to look magnificent
watch. Still the same story of superfluities! Now I think we in it, and chose that regiment only from vanity." Mercedes
are rich, since instead of the 114 francs we require for the sighed while endeavoring to smile; the devoted mother felt
journey we find ourselves in possession of 250."
that she ought not to allow the whole weight of the sacrifice
to fall upon her son. "Well, now you understand, mother!"
"But we owe something in this house?"
continued Albert; "here are more than 4,000 francs settled on
"Thirty francs; but I pay that out of my 150 francs, -- that is you; upon these you can live at least two years."
understood, -- and as I require only eighty francs for my
journey, you see I am overwhelmed with luxury. But that is "Do you think so?" said Mercedes. These words were uttered
in so mournful a tone that their real meaning did not escape
not all. What do you say to this, mother?"
Albert; he felt his heart beat, and taking his mother's hand
And Albert took out of a little pocket-book with golden within his own he said, tenderly, -clasps, a remnant of his old fancies, or perhaps a tender
souvenir from one of the mysterious and veiled ladies who "Yes, you will live!"
used to knock at his little door, -- Albert took out of this "I shall live! -- then you will not leave me, Albert?"
pocket-book a note of 1,000 francs.
"Mother, I must go," said Albert in a firm, calm voice; "you
"What is this?" asked Mercedes.
love me too well to wish me to remain useless and idle with
you; besides, I have signed."
"A thousand francs."
"But whence have you obtained them?"

"You will obey your own wish and the will of heaven!"

"Not my own wish, mother, but reason -- necessity. Are we
not two despairing creatures? What is life to you? -- Nothing.
What is life to me? -- Very little without you, mother; for
believe me, but for you I should have ceased to live on the
day I doubted my father and renounced his name. Well, I
will live, if you promise me still to hope; and if you grant me
the care of your future prospects, you will redouble my
strength. Then I will go to the governor of Algeria; he has a
"Dear child!" said Mercedes, endeavoring in vain to restrain royal heart, and is essentially a soldier; I will tell him my
a tear which glistened in the corner of her eye. "Indeed, you gloomy story. I will beg him to turn his eyes now and then
only wanted misfortune to change my love for you to towards me, and if he keep his word and interest himself for
admiration. I am not unhappy while I possess my son!"
me, in six months I shall be an officer, or dead. If I am an
"Ah, just so," said Albert; "here begins the trial. Do you know officer, your fortune is certain, for I shall have money
enough for both, and, moreover, a name we shall both be
the decision we have come to, mother?"
proud of, since it will be our own. If I am killed -- well then
"Have we come to any?"
mother, you can also die, and there will be an end of our
"Yes; it is decided that you are to live at Marseilles, and that I misfortunes."
am to leave for Africa, where I will earn for myself the right
"It is well," replied Mercedes, with her eloquent glance; "you
to use the name I now bear, instead of the one I have thrown
are right, my love; let us prove to those who are watching
aside." Mercedes sighed. "Well, mother, I yesterday engaged
our actions that we are worthy of compassion."
myself as substitute in the Spahis,"* added the young man,
lowering his eyes with a certain feeling of shame, for even he "But let us not yield to gloomy apprehensions," said the
was unconscious of the sublimity of his self-abasement. "I young man; "I assure you we are, or rather we shall be, very
thought my body was my own, and that I might sell it. I happy. You are a woman at once full of spirit and
yesterday took the place of another. I sold myself for more resignation; I have become simple in my tastes, and am
than I thought I was worth," he added, attempting to smile; without passion, I hope. Once in service, I shall be rich -once in M. Dantes' house, you will be at rest. Let us strive, I
"I fetched 2,000 francs."
beseech you, -- let us strive to be cheerful."
* The Spahis are French cavalry reserved for service in
"Yes, let us strive, for you ought to live, and to be happy,
Africa.
Albert."
"Then these 1,000 francs" -- said Mercedes, shuddering -"Listen to me, mother, and do not yield too much to
agitation." And Albert, rising, kissed his mother on both
cheeks, then stood looking at her. "You cannot imagine,
mother, how beautiful I think you!" said the young man,
impressed with a profound feeling of filial love. "You are,
indeed, the most beautiful and most noble woman I ever
saw!"

422

"And so our division is made, mother," said the young man, sir." Debray stepped forward, and cordially pressed the
affecting ease of mind. "We can now part; come, I shall hand of his interlocutor. "Believe me, dear Albert," he said,
engage your passage."
with all the emotion he was capable of feeling, -- "believe me,
I feel deeply for your misfortunes, and if in any way I can
"And you, my dear boy?"
serve you, I am yours."
"I shall stay here for a few days longer; we must accustom
"Thank you, sir," said Albert, smiling. "In the midst of our
ourselves to parting. I want recommendations and some
misfortunes, we are still rich enough not to require
information relative to Africa. I will join you again at
assistance from any one. We are leaving Paris, and when our
Marseilles."
journey is paid, we shall have 5,000 francs left." The blood
"Well, be it so -- let us part," said Mercedes, folding around mounted to the temples of Debray, who held a million in his
her shoulders the only shawl she had taken away, and which pocket-book, and unimaginative as he was he could not help
accidentally happened to be a valuable black cashmere. reflecting that the same house had contained two women,
Albert gathered up his papers hastily, rang the bell to pay one of whom, justly dishonored, had left it poor with
the thirty francs he owed to the landlord, and offering his 1,500,000 francs under her cloak, while the other, unjustly
arm to his mother, they descended the stairs. Some one was stricken, but sublime in her misfortune, was yet rich with a
walking down before them, and this person, hearing the few deniers. This parallel disturbed his usual politeness, the
rustling of a silk dress, turned around. "Debray!" muttered philosophy he witnessed appalled him, he muttered a few
Albert.
words of general civility and ran down-stairs.
"You, Morcerf?" replied the secretary, resting on the stairs.
Curiosity had vanquished the desire of preserving his
incognito, and he was recognized. It was, indeed, strange in
this unknown spot to find the young man whose
misfortunes had made so much noise in Paris.

That day the minister's clerks and the subordinates had a
great deal to put up with from his ill-humor. But that same
night, he found himself the possessor of a fine house,
situated on the Boulevard de la Madeleine, and an income of
50,000 livres. The next day, just as Debray was signing the
"Morcerf!" repeated Debray. Then noticing in the dim light deed, that is about five o'clock in the afternoon, Madame de
the still youthful and veiled figure of Madame de Morcerf: -- Morcerf, after having affectionately embraced her son,
"Pardon me," he added with a smile, "I leave you, Albert." entered the coupe of the diligence, which closed upon her. A
Albert understood his thoughts. "Mother," he said, turning man was hidden in Lafitte's banking-house, behind one of
towards Mercedes, "this is M. Debray, secretary of the the little arched windows which are placed above each desk;
he saw Mercedes enter the diligence, and he also saw Albert
minister for the interior, once a friend of mine."
withdraw. Then he passed his hand across his forehead,
"How once?" stammered Debray; "what do you mean?"
which was clouded with doubt. "Alas," he exclaimed, "how
"I say so, M. Debray, because I have no friends now, and I can I restore the happiness I have taken away from these
ought not to have any. I thank you for having recognized me, poor innocent creatures? God help me!"

423


CHAPTER 107 THE LIONS' DEN


Chapter 107 The Lions' Den

O

ne division of La Force, in which the most dangerous
and desperate prisoners are confined, is called the court
of Saint-Bernard. The prisoners, in their expressive language,
have named it the "Lions' Den," probably because the
captives possess teeth which frequently gnaw the bars, and
sometimes the keepers also. It is a prison within a prison; the
walls are double the thickness of the rest. The gratings are
every day carefully examined by jailers, whose herculean
proportions and cold pitiless expression prove them to have
been chosen to reign over their subjects for their superior
activity and intelligence. The court-yard of this quarter is
enclosed by enormous walls, over which the sun glances
obliquely, when it deigns to penetrate into this gulf of moral
and physical deformity. On this paved yard are to be seen, -pacing to and fro from morning till night, pale, careworn,
and haggard, like so many shadows, -- the men whom
justice holds beneath the steel she is sharpening. There,
crouched against the side of the wall which attracts and
retains the most heat, they may be seen sometimes talking to
one another, but more frequently alone, watching the door,
which sometimes opens to call forth one from the gloomy
assemblage, or to throw in another outcast from society.
The court of Saint-Bernard has its own particular apartment
for the reception of guests; it is a long rectangle, divided by
two upright gratings placed at a distance of three feet from
one another to prevent a visitor from shaking hands with or
passing anything to the prisoners. It is a wretched, damp,
nay, even horrible spot, more especially when we consider
the agonizing conferences which have taken place between
those iron bars. And yet, frightful though this spot may be, it
is looked upon as a kind of paradise by the men whose days
are numbered; it is so rare for them to leave the Lions' Den
for any other place than the barrier Saint-Jacques or the
galleys!

against which one of the keepers was leaning. "Come, sir," he
said, "lend me twenty francs; you will soon be paid; you run
no risks with me. Remember, I have relations who possess
more millions than you have deniers. Come, I beseech you,
lend me twenty francs, so that I may buy a dressing-gown; it
is intolerable always to be in a coat and boots! And what a
coat, sir, for a prince of the Cavalcanti!" The keeper turned
his back, and shrugged his shoulders; he did not even laugh
at what would have caused any one else to do so; he had
heard so many utter the same things, -- indeed, he heard
nothing else.
"Come," said Andrea, "you are a man void of compassion; I'll
have you turned out." This made the keeper turn around,
and he burst into a loud laugh. The prisoners then
approached and formed a circle. "I tell you that with that
wretched sum," continued Andrea, "I could obtain a coat,
and a room in which to receive the illustrious visitor I am
daily expecting."
"Of course -- of course," said the prisoners; -- "any one can
see he's a gentleman!"
"Well, then, lend him the twenty francs," said the keeper,
leaning on the other shoulder; "surely you will not refuse a
comrade!"
"I am no comrade of these people," said the young man,
proudly, "you have no right to insult me thus."

The thieves looked at one another with low murmurs, and a
storm gathered over the head of the aristocratic prisoner,
raised less by his own words than by the manner of the
keeper. The latter, sure of quelling the tempest when the
waves became too violent, allowed them to rise to a certain
pitch that he might be revenged on the importunate Andrea,
and besides it would afford him some recreation during the
long day. The thieves had already approached Andrea, some
In the court which we have attempted to describe, and from screaming, "La savate -- La savate!"* a cruel operation, which
which a damp vapor was rising, a young man with his consists in cuffing a comrade who may have fallen into
hands in his pockets, who had excited much curiosity among disgrace, not with an old shoe, but with an iron-heeled one.
the inhabitants of the "Den," might be seen walking. The cut Others proposed the "anguille," another kind of recreation, in
of his clothes would have made him pass for an elegant man, which a handkerchief is filled with sand, pebbles, and
if those clothes had not been torn to shreds; still they did not two-sous pieces, when they have them, which the wretches
show signs of wear, and the fine cloth, beneath the careful beat like a flail over the head and shoulders of the unhappy
hands of the prisoner, soon recovered its gloss in the parts sufferer. "Let us horsewhip the fine gentleman!" said others.
which were still perfect, for the wearer tried his best to make
it assume the appearance of a new coat. He bestowed the * Savate: an old shoe.
same attention upon the cambric front of a shirt, which had But Andrea, turning towards them, winked his eyes, rolled
considerably changed in color since his entrance into the his tongue around his cheeks, and smacked his lips in a
prison, and he polished his varnished boots with the corner manner equivalent to a hundred words among the bandits
of a handkerchief embroidered with initials surmounted by a when forced to be silent. It was a Masonic sign Caderousse
coronet. Some of the inmates of the "Lions' Den" were had taught him. He was immediately recognized as one of
watching the operations of the prisoner's toilet with them; the handkerchief was thrown down, and the
considerable interest. "See, the prince is pluming himself," iron-heeled shoe replaced on the foot of the wretch to whom
said one of the thieves. "He's a fine looking fellow," said it belonged. Some voices were heard to say that the
another; "if he had only a comb and hair-grease, he'd take gentleman was right; that he intended to be civil, in his way,
the shine off the gentlemen in white kids."
and that they would set the example of liberty of conscience,
"His coat looks almost new, and his boots shine like a -- and the mob retired. The keeper was so stupefied at this
nigger's face. It's pleasant to have such well-dressed scene that he took Andrea by the hands and began
comrades; but didn't those gendarmes behave shameful? -- examining his person, attributing the sudden submission of
the inmates of the Lions' Den to something more substantial
must 'a been jealous, to tear such clothes!"
than mere fascination. Andrea made no resistance, although
"He looks like a big-bug," said another; "dresses in fine style. he protested against it. Suddenly a voice was heard at the
And, then, to be here so young! Oh, what larks!" Meanwhile wicket. "Benedetto!" exclaimed an inspector. The keeper
the object of this hideous admiration approached the wicket, relaxed his hold. "I am called," said Andrea. "To the visitors'
424

room!" said the same voice.

protector."

"You see some one pays me a visit. Ah, my dear sir, you will
see whether a Cavalcanti is to be treated like a common
person!" And Andrea, gliding through the court like a black
shadow, rushed out through the wicket, leaving his
comrades, and even the keeper, lost in wonder. Certainly a
call to the visitors' room had scarcely astonished Andrea less
than themselves, for the wily youth, instead of making use of
his privilege of waiting to be claimed on his entry into La
Force, had maintained a rigid silence. "Everything," he said,
"proves me to be under the protection of some powerful
person, -- this sudden fortune, the facility with which I have
overcome all obstacles, an unexpected family and an
illustrious name awarded to me, gold showered down upon
me, and the most splendid alliances about to be entered into.
An unhappy lapse of fortune and the absence of my
protector have cast me down, certainly, but not forever. The
hand which has retreated for a while will be again stretched
forth to save me at the very moment when I shall think
myself sinking into the abyss. Why should I risk an
imprudent step? It might alienate my protector. He has two
means of extricating me from this dilemma, -- the one by a
mysterious escape, managed through bribery; the other by
buying off my judges with gold. I will say and do nothing
until I am convinced that he has quite abandoned me, and
then" --

The keeper spoke for a moment with an official, then opened
the iron gates and conducted Andrea to a room on the first
floor. The room was whitewashed, as is the custom in
prisons, but it looked quite brilliant to a prisoner, though a
stove, a bed, a chair, and a table formed the whole of its
sumptuous furniture. Bertuccio sat down upon the chair,
Andrea threw himself upon the bed; the keeper retired.

Andrea had formed a plan which was tolerably clever. The
unfortunate youth was intrepid in the attack, and rude in the
defence. He had borne with the public prison, and with
privations of all sorts; still, by degrees nature, or rather
custom, had prevailed, and he suffered from being naked,
dirty, and hungry. It was at this moment of discomfort that
the inspector's voice called him to the visiting-room. Andrea
felt his heart leap with joy. It was too soon for a visit from
the examining magistrate, and too late for one from the
director of the prison, or the doctor; it must, then, be the
visitor he hoped for. Behind the grating of the room into
which Andrea had been led, he saw, while his eyes dilated
with surprise, the dark and intelligent face of M. Bertuccio,
who was also gazing with sad astonishment upon the iron
bars, the bolted doors, and the shadow which moved behind
the other grating.

"No one."

Bertuccio.

"Well?"

"Now," said the steward, "what have you to tell me?"
"And you?" said Andrea.
"You speak first."
"Oh, no. You must have much to tell me, since you have
come to seek me."
"Well, be it so. You have continued your course of villany;
you have robbed -- you have assassinated."
"Well, I should say! If you had me taken to a private room
only to tell me this, you might have saved yourself the
trouble. I know all these things. But there are some with
which, on the contrary, I am not acquainted. Let us talk of
those, if you please. Who sent you?"
"Come, come, you are going on quickly, M. Benedetto!"
"Yes, and to the point. Let us dispense with useless words.
Who sends you?"
"How did you know I was in prison?"
"I recognized you, some time since, as the insolent dandy
who so gracefully mounted his horse in the Champs
Elysees."
"Oh, the Champs Elysees? Ah, yes; we burn, as they say at
the game of pincette. The Champs Elysees? Come, let us talk
a little about my father."
"Who, then, am I?"

"You, sir? -- you are my adopted father. But it was not you, I
presume, who placed at my disposal 100,000 francs, which I
spent in four or five months; it was not you who
manufactured an Italian gentleman for my father; it was not
you who introduced me into the world, and had me invited
"Ah," said Andrea, deeply affected.
to a certain dinner at Auteuil, which I fancy I am eating at
this moment, in company with the most distinguished
"Good morning, Benedetto," said Bertuccio, with his deep,
people in Paris -- amongst the rest with a certain procureur,
hollow voice.
whose acquaintance I did very wrong not to cultivate, for he
"You -- you?" said the young man, looking fearfully around would have been very useful to me just now; -- it was not
him.
you, in fact, who bailed me for one or two millions, when the
fatal discovery of my little secret took place. Come, speak,
"Do you not recognize me, unhappy child?"
my worthy Corsican, speak!"
"Silence, -- be silent!" said Andrea, who knew the delicate
sense of hearing possessed by the walls; "for heaven's sake, "What do you wish me to say?"
do not speak so loud!"
"I will help you. You were speaking of the Champs Elysees
"You wish to speak with me alone, do you not?" said just now, worthy foster-father."
"Oh, yes."

"Well, in the Champs Elysees there resides a very rich
"That is well." And Bertuccio, feeling in his pocket, signed to gentleman."
a keeper whom he saw through the window of the wicket.
"At whose house you robbed and murdered, did you not?"
"Read?" he said.

"I believe I did."

"What is that?" asked Andrea.

"The Count of Monte Cristo?"

"An order to conduct you to a room, and to leave you there
to talk to me."

"'Tis you who have named him, as M. Racine says. Well, am I
to rush into his arms, and strain him to my heart, crying,
"Oh," cried Andrea, leaping with joy. Then he mentally `My father, my father!' like Monsieur Pixerecourt."*
added, -- "Still my unknown protector! I am not forgotten. "Do not let us jest," gravely replied Bertuccio, "and dare not
They wish for secrecy, since we are to converse in a private to utter that name again as you have pronounced it."
room. I understand, Bertuccio has been sent by my
425


CHAPTER 107 THE LIONS' DEN

* Guilbert de Pixerecourt, French dramatist (1775-1844).

notwithstanding your millions. Come, who is my father?"

"Bah," said Andrea, a little overcome, by the solemnity of
Bertuccio's manner, "why not?"

"I came to tell you."

"Ah," cried Benedetto, his eyes sparkling with joy. Just then
"Because the person who bears it is too highly favored by the door opened, and the jailer, addressing himself to
heaven to be the father of such a wretch as you."
Bertuccio, said, -- "Excuse me, sir, but the examining
magistrate is waiting for the prisoner."
"Oh, these are fine words."
"And so closes our interview," said Andrea to the worthy
"And there will be fine doings, if you do not take care."
steward; "I wish the troublesome fellow were at the devil!"
"Menaces -- I do not fear them. I will say" -"I will return to-morrow," said Bertuccio.
"Do you think you are engaged with a pygmy like yourself?"
"Good! Gendarmes, I am at your service. Ah, sir, do leave a
said Bertuccio, in so calm a tone, and with so steadfast a look,
few crowns for me at the gate that I may have some things I
that Andrea was moved to the very soul. "Do you think you
am in need of!"
have to do with galley-slaves, or novices in the world?
Benedetto, you are fallen into terrible hands; they are ready "It shall be done," replied Bertuccio. Andrea extended his
to open for you -- make use of them. Do not play with the hand; Bertuccio kept his own in his pocket, and merely
thunderbolt they have laid aside for a moment, but which jingled a few pieces of money. "That's what I mean," said
they can take up again instantly, if you attempt to intercept Andrea, endeavoring to smile, quite overcome by the strange
their movements."
tranquillity of Bertuccio. "Can I be deceived?" he murmured,
as he stepped into the oblong and grated vehicle which they
"My father -- I will know who my father is," said the
call "the salad basket." "Never mind, we shall see!
obstinate youth; "I will perish if I must, but I will know it.
To-morrow, then!" he added, turning towards Bertuccio.
What does scandal signify to me? What possessions, what
reputation, what `pull,' as Beauchamp says, -- have I? You "To-morrow!" replied the steward.
great people always lose something by scandal,

426


Chapter 108 The Judge

W

e remember that the Abbe Busoni remained alone with
Noirtier in the chamber of death, and that the old man
and the priest were the sole guardians of the young girl's
body. Perhaps it was the Christian exhortations of the abbe,
perhaps his kind charity, perhaps his persuasive words,
which had restored the courage of Noirtier, for ever since he
had conversed with the priest his violent despair had
yielded to a calm resignation which surprised all who knew
his excessive affection for Valentine. M. de Villefort had not
seen his father since the morning of the death. The whole
establishment had been changed; another valet was engaged
for himself, a new servant for Noirtier, two women had
entered Madame de Villefort's service, -- in fact, everywhere,
to the concierge and coachmen, new faces were presented to
the different masters of the house, thus widening the
division which had always existed between the members of
the same family.

around the balcony.
The eye of the old man was riveted upon a spot which
Villefort could scarcely distinguish. His glance was so full of
hate, of ferocity, and savage impatience, that Villefort turned
out of the path he had been pursuing, to see upon what
person this dark look was directed. Then he saw beneath a
thick clump of linden-trees, which were nearly divested of
foliage, Madame de Villefort sitting with a book in her hand,
the perusal of which she frequently interrupted to smile
upon her son, or to throw back his elastic ball, which he
obstinately threw from the drawing-room into the garden.
Villefort became pale; he understood the old man's meaning.
Noirtier continued to look at the same object, but suddenly
his glance was transferred from the wife to the husband, and
Villefort himself had to submit to the searching investigation
of eyes, which, while changing their direction and even their
language, had lost none of their menacing expression.
Madame de Villefort, unconscious of the passions that
exhausted their fire over her head, at that moment held her
son's ball, and was making signs to him to reclaim it with a
kiss. Edward begged for a long while, the maternal kiss
probably not offering sufficient recompense for the trouble
he must take to obtain it; however at length he decided,
leaped out of the window into a cluster of heliotropes and
daisies, and ran to his mother, his forehead streaming with
perspiration. Madame de Villefort wiped his forehead,
pressed her lips upon it, and sent him back with the ball in
one hand and some bonbons in the other.

The assizes, also, were about to begin, and Villefort, shut up
in his room, exerted himself with feverish anxiety in
drawing up the case against the murderer of Caderousse.
This affair, like all those in which the Count of Monte Cristo
had interfered, caused a great sensation in Paris. The proofs
were certainly not convincing, since they rested upon a few
words written by an escaped galley-slave on his death-bed,
and who might have been actuated by hatred or revenge in
accusing his companion. But the mind of the procureur was
made up; he felt assured that Benedetto was guilty, and he
hoped by his skill in conducting this aggravated case to
flatter his self-love, which was about the only vulnerable
Villefort, drawn by an irresistible attraction, like that of the
point left in his frozen heart.
bird to the serpent, walked towards the house. As he
The case was therefore prepared owing to the incessant labor approached it, Noirtier's gaze followed him, and his eyes
of Villefort, who wished it to be the first on the list in the appeared of such a fiery brightness that Villefort felt them
coming assizes. He had been obliged to seclude himself pierce to the depths of his heart. In that earnest look might
more than ever, to evade the enormous number of be read a deep reproach, as well as a terrible menace. Then
applications presented to him for the purpose of obtaining Noirtier raised his eyes to heaven, as though to remind his
tickets of admission to the court on the day of trial. And then son of a forgotten oath. "It is well, sir," replied Villefort from
so short a time had elapsed since the death of poor Valentine, below, -- "it is well; have patience but one day longer; what I
and the gloom which overshadowed the house was so recent, have said I will do." Noirtier seemed to be calmed by these
that no one wondered to see the father so absorbed in his words, and turned his eyes with indifference to the other
professional duties, which were the only means he had of side. Villefort violently unbuttoned his great-coat, which
dissipating his grief.
seemed to strangle him, and passing his livid hand across his
forehead, entered his study.
Once only had Villefort seen his father; it was the day after
that upon which Bertuccio had paid his second visit to The night was cold and still; the family had all retired to rest
Benedetto, when the latter was to learn his father's name. but Villefort, who alone remained up, and worked till five
The magistrate, harassed and fatigued, had descended to the o'clock in the morning, reviewing the last interrogatories
garden of his house, and in a gloomy mood, similar to that in made the night before by the examining magistrates,
which Tarquin lopped off the tallest poppies, he began compiling the depositions of the witnesses, and putting the
knocking off with his cane the long and dying branches of finishing stroke to the deed of accusation, which was one of
the rose-trees, which, placed along the avenue, seemed like the most energetic and best conceived of any he had yet
the spectres of the brilliant flowers which had bloomed in delivered.
the past season. More than once he had reached that part of
The next day, Monday, was the first sitting of the assizes.
the garden where the famous boarded gate stood
The morning dawned dull and gloomy, and Villefort saw the
overlooking the deserted enclosure, always returning by the
dim gray light shine upon the lines he had traced in red ink.
same path, to begin his walk again, at the same pace and
The magistrate had slept for a short time while the lamp sent
with the same gesture, when he accidentally turned his eyes
forth its final struggles; its flickerings awoke him, and he
towards the house, whence he heard the noisy play of his
found his fingers as damp and purple as though they had
son, who had returned from school to spend the Sunday and
been dipped in blood. He opened the window; a bright
Monday with his mother. While doing so, he observed M.
yellow streak crossed the sky, and seemed to divide in half
Noirtier at one of the open windows, where the old man had
the poplars, which stood out in black relief on the horizon. In
been placed that he might enjoy the last rays of the sun
the clover-fields beyond the chestnut-trees, a lark was
which yet yielded some heat, and was now shining upon the
mounting up to heaven, while pouring out her clear
dying flowers and red leaves of the creeper which twined
427


CHAPTER 108 THE JUDGE

morning song. The damps of the dew bathed the head of
Villefort, and refreshed his memory. "To-day," he said with
an effort, -- "to-day the man who holds the blade of justice
must strike wherever there is guilt." Involuntarily his eyes
wandered towards the window of Noirtier's room, where he
had seen him the preceding night. The curtain was drawn,
and yet the image of his father was so vivid to his mind that
he addressed the closed window as though it had been open,
and as if through the opening he had beheld the menacing
old man. "Yes," he murmured, -- "yes, be satisfied."

had finished dressing."

deal in the murder case, and that you should take something
to keep up your strength;" and the valet placed the cup on
the table nearest to the sofa, which was, like all the rest,
covered with papers. The valet then left the room. Villefort
looked for an instant with a gloomy expression, then,
suddenly, taking it up with a nervous motion, he swallowed
its contents at one draught. It might have been thought that
he hoped the beverage would be mortal, and that he sought
for death to deliver him from a duty which he would rather
die than fulfil. He then rose, and paced his room with a smile
it would have been terrible to witness. The chocolate was
inoffensive, for M. de Villefort felt no effects. The
breakfast-hour arrived, but M. de Villefort was not at table.
The valet re-entered.

"Edward," cried M. de Villefort, so harshly that the child
started up from the floor, "do you hear me? -- Go!" The child,
unaccustomed to such treatment, arose, pale and trembling;
it would be difficult to say whether his emotion were caused
by fear or passion. His father went up to him, took him in his
arms, and kissed his forehead. "Go," he said: "go, my child."
Edward ran out. M. de Villefort went to the door, which he
closed behind the child, and bolted. "Dear me!" said the
young woman, endeavoring to read her husband's inmost
thoughts, while a smile passed over her countenance which
froze the impassibility of Villefort; "what is the matter?"

"I am going to her." And Villefort, with his papers under his
arm and hat in hand, directed his steps toward the
apartment of his wife. At the door he paused for a moment
to wipe his damp, pale brow. He then entered the room.
Madame de Villefort was sitting on an ottoman and
impatiently turning over the leaves of some newspapers and
pamphlets which young Edward, by way of amusing
himself, was tearing to pieces before his mother could finish
reading them. She was dressed to go out, her bonnet was
His head dropped upon his chest, and in this position he placed beside her on a chair, and her gloves were on her
paced his study; then he threw himself, dressed as he was, hands.
upon a sofa, less to sleep than to rest his limbs, cramped
"Ah, here you are, monsieur," she said in her naturally calm
with cold and study. By degrees every one awoke. Villefort,
voice; "but how pale you are! Have you been working all
from his study, heard the successive noises which
night? Why did you not come down to breakfast? Well, will
accompany the life of a house, -- the opening and shutting of
you take me, or shall I take Edward?" Madame de Villefort
doors, the ringing of Madame de Villefort's bell, to summon
had multiplied her questions in order to gain one answer,
the waiting-maid, mingled with the first shouts of the child,
but to all her inquiries M. de Villefort remained mute and
who rose full of the enjoyment of his age. Villefort also rang;
cold as a statue. "Edward," said Villefort, fixing an imperious
his new valet brought him the papers, and with them a cup
glance on the child, "go and play in the drawing-room, my
of chocolate.
dear; I wish to speak to your mamma." Madame de Villefort
"What are you bringing me?" said he.
shuddered at the sight of that cold countenance, that resolute
tone, and the awfully strange preliminaries. Edward raised
"A cup of chocolate."
his head, looked at his mother, and then, finding that she did
"I did not ask for it. Who has paid me this attention?"
not confirm the order, began cutting off the heads of his
"My mistress, sir. She said you would have to speak a great leaden soldiers.

"Madame de Villefort wishes to remind you, sir," he said,
"that eleven o'clock has just struck, and that the trial
commences at twelve."

"Madame, where do you keep the poison you generally
use?" said the magistrate, without any introduction, placing
himself between his wife and the door.

Madame de Villefort must have experienced something of
the sensation of a bird which, looking up, sees the
murderous trap closing over its head. A hoarse, broken tone,
"Well," said Villefort, "what then?"
which was neither a cry nor a sigh, escaped from her, while
"Madame de Villefort is dressed; she is quite ready, and she became deadly pale. "Monsieur," she said, "I -- I do not
understand you." And, in her first paroxysm of terror, she
wishes to know if she is to accompany you, sir?"
had raised herself from the sofa, in the next, stronger very
"Where to?"
likely than the other, she fell down again on the cushions. "I
asked you," continued Villefort, in a perfectly calm tone,
"To the Palais."
"where you conceal the poison by the aid of which you have
"What to do?"
killed my father-in-law, M. de Saint-Meran, my
"My mistress wishes much to be present at the trial."
mother-in-law, Madame de Saint-Meran, Barrois, and my
"Ah," said Villefort, with a startling accent; "does she wish daughter Valentine."
that?" -- The man drew back and said, "If you wish to go "Ah, sir," exclaimed Madame de Villefort, clasping her hands,
alone, sir, I will go and tell my mistress." Villefort remained "what do you say?"
silent for a moment, and dented his pale cheeks with his
"It is not for you to interrogate, but to answer."
nails. "Tell your mistress," he at length answered, "that I
wish to speak to her, and I beg she will wait for me in her "Is it to the judge or to the husband?" stammered Madame
de Villefort. "To the judge -- to the judge, madame!" It was
own room."
terrible to behold the frightful pallor of that woman, the
"Yes, sir."
anguish of her look, the trembling of her whole frame. "Ah,
"Then come to dress and shave me."
sir," she muttered, "ah, sir," and this was all.
"Directly, sir." The valet re-appeared almost instantly, and,
having shaved his master, assisted him to dress entirely in
black. When he had finished, he said, -"My mistress said she should expect you, sir, as soon as you
428

"You do not answer, madame!" exclaimed the terrible
interrogator. Then he added, with a smile yet more terrible
than his anger, "It is true, then; you do not deny it!" She
moved forward. "And you cannot deny it!" added Villefort,
extending his hand toward her, as though to seize her in the

name of justice. "You have accomplished these different
crimes with impudent address, but which could only deceive
those whose affections for you blinded them. Since the death
of Madame de Saint-Meran, I have known that a poisoner
lived in my house. M. d'Avrigny warned me of it. After the
death of Barrois my suspicions were directed towards an
angel, -- those suspicions which, even when there is no crime,
are always alive in my heart; but after the death of Valentine,
there has been no doubt in my mind, madame, and not only
in mine, but in those of others; thus your crime, known by
two persons, suspected by many, will soon become public,
and, as I told you just now, you no longer speak to the
husband, but to the judge."
The young woman hid her face in her hands. "Oh, sir," she
stammered, "I beseech you, do not believe appearances."

"No, no -- oh, no!"
"Well, madame, it will be a laudable action on your part, and
I will thank you for it!"
"You will thank me -- for what?"
"For what you have just said."
"What did I say? Oh, my brain whirls; I no longer
understand anything. Oh, my God, my God!" And she rose,
with her hair dishevelled, and her lips foaming.
"Have you answered the question I put to you on entering
the room? -- where do you keep the poison you generally
use, madame?" Madame de Villefort raised her arms to
heaven, and convulsively struck one hand against the other.
"No, no," she vociferated, "no, you cannot wish that!"

"Are you, then, a coward?" cried Villefort, in a contemptuous
voice. "But I have always observed that poisoners were
cowards. Can you be a coward, -- you who have had the
courage to witness the death of two old men and a young
girl murdered by you?"

"What I do not wish, madame, is that you should perish on
the scaffold. Do you understand?" asked Villefort.

"The punishment?" exclaimed Madame de Villefort, "the
punishment, monsieur? Twice you have pronounced that
word!"

"No, no, no, I tell you; one day, if I allow you to live, you will
perhaps kill him, as you have the others!"

"Oh, mercy, mercy, monsieur!"

"What I require is, that justice be done. I am on the earth to
punish, madame," he added, with a flaming glance; "any
"Sir! sir!"
other woman, were it the queen herself, I would send to the
"Can you be a coward?" continued Villefort, with increasing executioner; but to you I shall be merciful. To you I will say,
excitement, "you, who could count, one by one, the minutes `Have you not, madame, put aside some of the surest,
of four death agonies? You, who have arranged your infernal deadliest, most speedy poison?'"
plans, and removed the beverages with a talent and "Oh, pardon me, sir; let me live!"
precision almost miraculous? Have you, then, who have
"She is cowardly," said Villefort.
calculated everything with such nicety, have you forgotten
to calculate one thing -- I mean where the revelation of your "Reflect that I am your wife!"
crimes will lead you to? Oh, it is impossible -- you must have "You are a poisoner."
saved some surer, more subtle and deadly poison than any
other, that you might escape the punishment that you "In the name of heaven!"
deserve. You have done this -- I hope so, at least." Madame "No!"
de Villefort stretched out her hands, and fell on her knees.
"In the name of the love you once bore me!"
"I understand," he said, "you confess; but a confession made
"No, no!"
to the judges, a confession made at the last moment, extorted
when the crime cannot be denied, diminishes not the "In the name of our child! Ah, for the sake of our child, let
me live!"
punishment inflicted on the guilty!"

"I? -- I kill my boy?" cried the distracted mother, rushing
toward Villefort; "I kill my son? Ha, ha, ha!" and a frightful,
demoniac laugh finished the sentence, which was lost in a
hoarse rattle. Madame de Villefort fell at her husband's feet.
He approached her. "Think of it, madame," he said; "if, on
my return, justice his not been satisfied, I will denounce you
with my own mouth, and arrest you with my own hands!"
She listened, panting, overwhelmed, crushed; her eye alone
lived, and glared horribly. "Do you understand me?" he said.
"I am going down there to pronounce the sentence of death
against a murderer. If I find you alive on my return, you
shall sleep to-night in the conciergerie." Madame de Villefort
sighed; her nerves gave way, and she sunk on the carpet.
The king's attorney seemed to experience a sensation of pity;
he looked upon her less severely, and, bowing to her, said
"No, I do not understand; what do you mean?" stammered
slowly, "Farewell, madame, farewell!" That farewell struck
the unhappy woman, completely overwhelmed. "I mean that
Madame de Villefort like the executioner's knife. She fainted.
the wife of the first magistrate in the capital shall not, by her
The procureur went out, after having double-locked the
infamy, soil an unblemished name; that she shall not, with
door.
one blow, dishonor her husband and her child."
"Certainly. Did you hope to escape it because you were four
times guilty? Did you think the punishment would be
withheld because you are the wife of him who pronounces it?
-- No, madame, no; the scaffold awaits the poisoner,
whoever she may be, unless, as I just said, the poisoner has
taken the precaution of keeping for herself a few drops of
her deadliest potion." Madame de Villefort uttered a wild cry,
and a hideous and uncontrollable terror spread over her
distorted features. "Oh, do not fear the scaffold, madame,"
said the magistrate; "I will not dishonor you, since that
would be dishonor to myself; no, if you have heard me
distinctly, you will understand that you are not to die on the
scaffold."

429


CHAPTER 109 THE ASSIZES


Chapter 109 The Assizes

T

he Benedetto affair, as it was called at the Palais, and by
people in general, had produced a tremendous sensation.
Frequenting the Cafe de Paris, the Boulevard de Gand, and
the Bois de Boulogne, during his brief career of splendor, the
false Cavalcanti had formed a host of acquaintances. The
papers had related his various adventures, both as the man
of fashion and the galley-slave; and as every one who had
been personally acquainted with Prince Andrea Cavalcanti
experienced a lively curiosity in his fate, they all determined
to spare no trouble in endeavoring to witness the trial of M.
Benedetto for the murder of his comrade in chains. In the
eyes of many, Benedetto appeared, if not a victim to, at least
an instance of, the fallibility of the law. M. Cavalcanti, his
father, had been seen in Paris, and it was expected that he
would re-appear to claim the illustrious outcast. Many, also,
who were not aware of the circumstances attending his
withdrawal from Paris, were struck with the worthy
appearance, the gentlemanly bearing, and the knowledge of
the world displayed by the old patrician, who certainly
played the nobleman very well, so long as he said nothing,
and made no arithmetical calculations. As for the accused
himself, many remembered him as being so amiable, so
handsome, and so liberal, that they chose to think him the
victim of some conspiracy, since in this world large fortunes
frequently excite the malevolence and jealousy of some
unknown enemy. Every one, therefore, ran to the court;
some to witness the sight, others to comment upon it. From
seven o'clock in the morning a crowd was stationed at the
iron gates, and an hour before the trial commenced the hall
was full of the privileged. Before the entrance of the
magistrates, and indeed frequently afterwards, a court of
justice, on days when some especial trial is to take place,
resembles a drawing-room where many persons recognize
each other and converse if they can do so without losing
their seats; or, if they are separated by too great a number of
lawyers, communicate by signs.
It was one of the magnificent autumn days which make
amends for a short summer; the clouds which M. de Villefort
had perceived at sunrise had all disappeared as if by magic,
and one of the softest and most brilliant days of September
shone forth in all its splendor.
Beauchamp, one of the kings of the press, and therefore
claiming the right of a throne everywhere, was eying
everybody
through
his
monocle.
He
perceived
Chateau-Renaud and Debray, who had just gained the good
graces of a sergeant-at-arms, and who had persuaded the
latter to let them stand before, instead of behind him, as they
ought to have done. The worthy sergeant had recognized the
minister's secretary and the millionnaire, and, by way of
paying extra attention to his noble neighbors, promised to
keep their places while they paid a visit to Beauchamp.
"Well," said Beauchamp, "we shall see our friend!"

"My dear fellow, I think we should ask you that question;
you know such news much better than we do. Did you see
the president at the minister's last night?"
"Yes."
"What did he say?"
"Something which will surprise you."
"Oh, make haste and tell me, then; it is a long time since that
has happened."
"Well, he told me that Benedetto, who is considered a
serpent of subtlety and a giant of cunning, is really but a
very commonplace, silly rascal, and altogether unworthy of
the experiments that will be made on his phrenological
organs after his death."
"Bah," said Beauchamp, "he played the prince very well."
"Yes, for you who detest those unhappy princes, Beauchamp,
and are always delighted to find fault with them; but not for
me, who discover a gentleman by instinct, and who scent out
an aristocratic family like a very bloodhound of heraldry."
"Then you never believed in the principality?"
"Yes. -- in the principality, but not in the prince."
"Not so bad," said Beauchamp; "still, I assure you, he passed
very well with many people; I saw him at the ministers'
houses."
"Ah, yes," said Chateau-Renaud. "The idea of thinking
ministers understand anything about princes!"
"There is something in what you have just said," said
Beauchamp, laughing.
"But," said Debray to Beauchamp, "if I spoke to the president,
you must have been with the procureur."
"It was an impossibility; for the last week M. de Villefort has
secluded himself. It is natural enough; this strange chain of
domestic afflictions, followed by the no less strange death of
his daughter" -"Strange? What do you mean, Beauchamp?"
"Oh, yes; do you pretend that all this has been unobserved at
the minister's?" said Beauchamp, placing his eye-glass in his
eye, where he tried to make it remain.
"My dear sir," said Chateau-Renaud, "allow me to tell you
that you do not understand that manoeuvre with the
eye-glass half so well as Debray. Give him a lesson, Debray."
"Stay," said Beauchamp, "surely I am not deceived."
"What is it?"
"It is she!"
"Whom do you mean?"

"They said she had left."
"Yes, indeed!" replied Debray. "That worthy prince. Deuce
"Mademoiselle Eugenie?" said Chateau-Renaud; "has she
take those Italian princes!"
returned?"
"A man, too, who could boast of Dante for a genealogist, and
"No, but her mother."
could reckon back to the `Divine Comedy.'"
"Madame
Danglars?
Nonsense!
Impossible!"
said
Chateau-Renaud; "only ten days after the flight of her
daughter, and three days from the bankruptcy of her
"He will be condemned, will he not?" asked Debray of
husband?"
Beauchamp.
"A nobility of
phlegmatically.

430

the

rope!"

said

Chateau-Renaud

Debray colored slightly, and followed with his eyes the
direction of Beauchamp's glance. "Come," he said, "it is only
a veiled lady, some foreign princess, perhaps the mother of
Cavalcanti. But you were just speaking on a very interesting
topic, Beauchamp."

"We are listening."

"`Multitudinously' [drv] is good," said Chateau-Renaud.

"How can I tell? You are questioning me like a king's
attorney. I only repeat what I have been told, and like my
informant I can do no more. The poor devil would eat
nothing, from fear."

"It appears the dear child has obtained possession of a bottle
containing some drug, which he every now and then uses
against those who have displeased him. First, M. and
Madame de Saint-Meran incurred his displeasure, so he
"I?"
poured out three drops of his elixir -- three drops were
sufficient; then followed Barrois, the old servant of M.
"Yes; you were telling us about the extraordinary death of
Noirtier, who sometimes rebuffed this little wretch -- he
Valentine."
therefore received the same quantity of the elixir; the same
"Ah, yes, so I was. But how is it that Madame de Villefort is happened to Valentine, of whom he was jealous; he gave her
not here?"
the same dose as the others, and all was over for her as well
"Poor, dear woman," said Debray, "she is no doubt occupied as the rest."
in distilling balm for the hospitals, or in making cosmetics "Why, what nonsense are you telling us?" said
for herself or friends. Do you know she spends two or three Chateau-Renaud.
thousand crowns a year in this amusement? But I wonder
"Yes, it is an extraordinary story," said Beauchamp; "is it
she is not here. I should have been pleased to see her, for I
not?"
like her very much."
"It is absurd," said Debray.
"And I hate her," said Chateau-Renaud.
"Ah," said Beauchamp, "you doubt me? Well, you can ask
"Why?"
my servant, or rather him who will no longer be my servant
"I do not know. Why do we love? Why do we hate? I detest to-morrow, it was the talk of the house."
her, from antipathy."
"And this elixir, where is it? what is it?"
"Or, rather, by instinct."
"The child conceals it."
"Perhaps so. But to return to what you were saying,
"But where did he find it?"
Beauchamp."
"In his mother's laboratory."
"Well, do you know why they die so multitudinously at M.
de Villefort's?"
"Does his mother then, keep poisons in her laboratory?"
"My good fellow, you'll find the word in Saint-Simon."
"But the thing itself is at M. de Villefort's; but let's get back to
the subject."
"Talking of that," said Debray, "Madame was making
inquiries about that house, which for the last three months
has been hung with black."
"Who is Madame?" asked Chateau-Renaud.
"The minister's wife, pardieu!"
"Oh, your pardon! I never visit ministers; I leave that to the
princes."
"Really, You were only before sparkling, but now you are
brilliant; take compassion on us, or, like Jupiter, you will
wither us up."
"I will not speak again," said Chateau-Renaud; "pray have
compassion upon me, and do not take up every word I say."

"It is incredible!"
"No, my dear fellow, it is not at all incredible. You saw the
child pass through the Rue Richelieu last year, who amused
himself with killing his brothers and sisters by sticking pins
in their ears while they slept. The generation who follow us
are very precocious."
"Come, Beauchamp," said Chateau-Renaud, "I will bet
anything you do not believe a word of all you have been
telling us."
"I do not see the Count of Monte Cristo here."
"He is worn out," said Debray; "besides, he could not well
appear in public, since he has been the dupe of the
Cavalcanti, who, it appears, presented themselves to him
with false letters of credit, and cheated him out of 100,000
francs upon the hypothesis of this principality."

"Come, let us endeavor to get to the end of our story,
Beauchamp; I told you that yesterday Madame made
inquiries of me upon the subject; enlighten me, and I will "By the way, M. de Chateau-Renaud," asked Beauchamp,
"how is Morrel?"
then communicate my information to her."
"Well, gentlemen, the reason people die so multitudinously "Ma foi, I have called three times without once seeing him.
(I like the word) at M. de Villefort's is that there is an Still, his sister did not seem uneasy, and told me that though
assassin in the house!" The two young men shuddered, for she had not seen him for two or three days, she was sure he
the same idea had more than once occurred to them. "And was well."
who is the assassin;" they asked together.

"Ah, now I think of it, the Count of Monte Cristo cannot
"Young Edward!" A burst of laughter from the auditors did appear in the hall," said Beauchamp.
not in the least disconcert the speaker, who continued, -- "Why not?"
"Yes, gentlemen; Edward, the infant phenomenon, who is
"Because he is an actor in the drama."
quite an adept in the art of killing."
"Has he assassinated any one, then?"
"You are jesting."
"No, on the contrary, they wished to assassinate him. You
"Not at all. I yesterday engaged a servant, who had just left
know that it was in leaving his house that M. de Caderousse
M. de Villefort -- I intend sending him away to-morrow, for
was murdered by his friend Benedetto. You know that the
he eats so enormously, to make up for the fast imposed upon
famous waistcoat was found in his house, containing the
him by his terror in that house. Well, now listen."
letter which stopped the signature of the marriage-contract.
431


CHAPTER 109 THE ASSIZES

Do you see the waistcoat? There it is, all blood-stained, on
the desk, as a testimony of the crime."
"Ah, very good."
"Hush, gentlemen, here is the court; let us go back to our

432

places." A noise was heard in the hall; the sergeant called his
two patrons with an energetic "hem!" and the door-keeper
appearing, called out with that shrill voice peculiar to his
order, ever since the days of Beaumarchais, "The court,
gentlemen!"


Chapter 110 The Indictment

T

he judges took their places in the midst of the most
profound silence; the jury took their seats; M. de
Villefort, the object of unusual attention, and we had almost
said of general admiration, sat in the arm-chair and cast a
tranquil glance around him. Every one looked with
astonishment on that grave and severe face, whose calm
expression personal griefs had been unable to disturb, and
the aspect of a man who was a stranger to all human
emotions excited something very like terror.
"Gendarmes," said the president, "lead in the accused."
At these words the public attention became more intense,
and all eyes were turned towards the door through which
Benedetto was to enter. The door soon opened and the
accused appeared. The same impression was experienced by
all present, and no one was deceived by the expression of his
countenance. His features bore no sign of that deep emotion
which stops the beating of the heart and blanches the cheek.
His hands, gracefully placed, one upon his hat, the other in
the opening of his white waistcoat, were not at all tremulous;
his eye was calm and even brilliant. Scarcely had he entered
the hall when he glanced at the whole body of magistrates
and assistants; his eye rested longer on the president, and
still more so on the king's attorney. By the side of Andrea
was stationed the lawyer who was to conduct his defence,
and who had been appointed by the court, for Andrea
disdained to pay any attention to those details, to which he
appeared to attach no importance. The lawyer was a young
man with light hair whose face expressed a hundred times
more emotion than that which characterized the prisoner.
The president called for the indictment, revised as we know,
by the clever and implacable pen of Villefort. During the
reading of this, which was long, the public attention was
continually drawn towards Andrea, who bore the inspection
with Spartan unconcern. Villefort had never been so concise
and eloquent. The crime was depicted in the most vivid
colors; the former life of the prisoner, his transformation, a
review of his life from the earliest period, were set forth with
all the talent that a knowledge of human life could furnish to
a mind like that of the procureur. Benedetto was thus forever
condemned in public opinion before the sentence of the law
could be pronounced. Andrea paid no attention to the
successive charges which were brought against him. M. de
Villefort, who examined him attentively, and who no doubt
practiced upon him all the psychological studies he was
accustomed to use, in vain endeavored to make him lower
his eyes, notwithstanding the depth and profundity of his
gaze. At length the reading of the indictment was ended.
"Accused," said the president, "your name and surname?"
Andrea arose. "Excuse me, Mr. President," he said, in a clear
voice, "but I see you are going to adopt a course of questions
through which I cannot follow you. I have an idea, which I
will explain by and by, of making an exception to the usual
form of accusation. Allow me, then, if you please, to answer
in different order, or I will not do so at all." The astonished
president looked at the jury, who in turn looked at Villefort.
The whole assembly manifested great surprise, but Andrea
appeared quite unmoved. "Your age?" said the president;
"will you answer that question?"

"Your age?" repeated the president.
"I am twenty-one years old, or rather I shall be in a few days,
as I was born the night of the 27th of September, 1817." M. de
Villefort, who was busy taking down some notes, raised his
head at the mention of this date. "Where were you born?"
continued the president.
"At Auteuil, near Paris." M. de Villefort a second time raised
his head, looked at Benedetto as if he had been gazing at the
head of Medusa, and became livid. As for Benedetto, he
gracefully wiped his lips with a fine cambric
pocket-handkerchief. "Your profession?"
"First I was a forger," answered Andrea, as calmly as
possible; "then I became a thief, and lately have become an
assassin." A murmur, or rather storm, of indignation burst
from all parts of the assembly. The judges themselves
appeared to be stupefied, and the jury manifested tokens of
disgust for cynicism so unexpected in a man of fashion. M.
de Villefort pressed his hand upon his brow, which, at first
pale, had become red and burning; then he suddenly arose
and looked around as though he had lost his senses -- he
wanted air.
"Are you looking for anything, Mr. Procureur?" asked
Benedetto, with his most ingratiating smile. M. de Villefort
answered nothing, but sat, or rather threw himself down
again upon his chair. "And now, prisoner, will you consent
to tell your name?" said the president. "The brutal affectation
with which you have enumerated and classified your crimes
calls for a severe reprimand on the part of the court, both in
the name of morality, and for the respect due to humanity.
You appear to consider this a point of honor, and it may be
for this reason, that you have delayed acknowledging your
name. You wished it to be preceded by all these titles."
"It is quite wonderful, Mr. President, how entirely you have
read my thoughts," said Benedetto, in his softest voice and
most polite manner. "This is, indeed, the reason why I
begged you to alter the order of the questions." The public
astonishment had reached its height. There was no longer
any deceit or bravado in the manner of the accused. The
audience felt that a startling revelation was to follow this
ominous prelude.
"Well," said the president; "your name?"
"I cannot tell you my name, since I do not know it; but I
know my father's, and can tell it to you."
A painful giddiness overwhelmed Villefort; great drops of
acrid sweat fell from his face upon the papers which he held
in his convulsed hand.
"Repeat your father's name," said the president. Not a
whisper, not a breath, was heard in that vast assembly; every
one waited anxiously.
"My father is king's attorney," replied Andrea calmly.
"King's attorney?" said the president, stupefied, and without
noticing the agitation which spread over the face of M. de
Villefort; "king's attorney?"

"Yes; and if you wish to know his name, I will tell it, -- he is
named Villefort." The explosion, which had been so long
"I will answer that question, as well as the rest, Mr. President, restrained from a feeling of respect to the court of justice,
now burst forth like thunder from the breasts of all present;
but in its turn."
the court itself did not seek to restrain the feelings of the
433


CHAPTER 110 THE INDICTMENT

audience. The exclamations, the insults addressed to
Benedetto, who remained perfectly unconcerned, the
energetic gestures, the movement of the gendarmes, the
sneers of the scum of the crowd always sure to rise to the
surface in case of any disturbance -- all this lasted five
minutes, before the door-keepers and magistrates were able
to restore silence. In the midst of this tumult the voice of the
president was heard to exclaim, -- "Are you playing with
justice, accused, and do you dare set your fellow-citizens an
example of disorder which even in these times his never
been equalled?"
Several persons hurried up to M. de Villefort, who sat half
bowed over in his chair, offering him consolation,
encouragement, and protestations of zeal and sympathy.
Order was re-established in the hall, except that a few people
still moved about and whispered to one another. A lady, it
was said, had just fainted; they had supplied her with a
smelling-bottle, and she had recovered. During the scene of
tumult, Andrea had turned his smiling face towards the
assembly; then, leaning with one hand on the oaken rail of
the dock, in the most graceful attitude possible, he said:
"Gentlemen, I assure you I had no idea of insulting the court,
or of making a useless disturbance in the presence of this
honorable assembly. They ask my age; I tell it. They ask
where I was born; I answer. They ask my name, I cannot give
it, since my parents abandoned me. But though I cannot give
my own name, not possessing one, I can tell them my
father's. Now I repeat, my father is named M. de Villefort,
and I am ready to prove it."

up in Corsica."
There was a moment's silence, during which one could have
fancied the hall empty, so profound was the stillness.
"Proceed," said the president.
"Certainly, I might have lived happily amongst those good
people, who adored me, but my perverse disposition
prevailed over the virtues which my adopted mother
endeavored to instil into my heart. I increased in wickedness
till I committed crime. One day when I cursed providence
for making me so wicked, and ordaining me to such a fate,
my adopted father said to me, `Do not blaspheme, unhappy
child, the crime is that of your father, not yours, -- of your
father, who consigned you to hell if you died, and to misery
if a miracle preserved you alive.' After that I ceased to
blaspheme, but I cursed my father. That is why I have
uttered the words for which you blame me; that is why I
have filled this whole assembly with horror. If I have
committed an additional crime, punish me, but if you will
allow that ever since the day of my birth my fate has been
sad, bitter, and lamentable, then pity me."
"But your mother?" asked the president.

"My mother thought me dead; she is not guilty. I did not
even wish to know her name, nor do I know it." Just then a
piercing cry, ending in a sob, burst from the centre of the
crowd, who encircled the lady who had before fainted, and
who now fell into a violent fit of hysterics. She was carried
out of the hall, the thick veil which concealed her face
dropped off, and Madame Danglars was recognized.
There was an energy, a conviction, and a sincerity in the Notwithstanding his shattered nerves, the ringing sensation
manner of the young man, which silenced the tumult. All in his ears, and the madness which turned his brain, Villefort
eyes were turned for a moment towards the procureur, who rose as he perceived her. "The proofs, the proofs!" said the
sat as motionless as though a thunderbolt had changed him president; "remember this tissue of horrors must be
into a corpse. "Gentlemen," said Andrea, commanding supported by the clearest proofs "
silence by his voice and manner; "I owe you the proofs and "The proofs?" said Benedetto, laughing; "do you want
explanations of what I have said."
proofs?"
"But," said the irritated president, "you called yourself "Yes."
Benedetto, declared yourself an orphan, and claimed Corsica
"Well, then, look at M. de Villefort, and then ask me for
as your country."
proofs."
"I said anything I pleased, in order that the solemn
declaration I have just made should not be withheld, which Every one turned towards the procureur, who, unable to
otherwise would certainly have been the case. I now repeat bear the universal gaze now riveted on him alone, advanced
that I was born at Auteuil on the night of the 27th of staggering into the midst of the tribunal, with his hair
September, 1817, and that I am the son of the procureur, M. dishevelled and his face indented with the mark of his nails.
de Villefort. Do you wish for any further details? I will give The whole assembly uttered a long murmur of astonishment.
them. I was born in No. 28, Rue de la Fontaine, in a room "Father," said Benedetto, "I am asked for proofs, do you wish
hung with red damask; my father took me in his arms, me to give them?"
telling my mother I was dead, wrapped me in a napkin "No, no, it is useless," stammered M. de Villefort in a hoarse
marked with an H and an N, and carried me into a garden, voice; "no, it is useless!"
where he buried me alive."
"How useless?" cried the president, "what do you mean?"
A shudder ran through the assembly when they saw that the
"I mean that I feel it impossible to struggle against this
confidence of the prisoner increased in proportion to the
deadly weight which crushes me. Gentlemen, I know I am in
terror of M. de Villefort. "But how have you become
the hands of an avenging God! We need no proofs;
acquainted with all these details?" asked the president.
everything relating to this young man is true." A dull,
"I will tell you, Mr. President. A man who had sworn gloomy silence, like that which precedes some awful
vengeance against my father, and had long watched his phenomenon of nature, pervaded the assembly, who
opportunity to kill him, had introduced himself that night shuddered in dismay. "What, M. de Villefort," cried the
into the garden in which my father buried me. He was president, "do you yield to an hallucination? What, are you
concealed in a thicket; he saw my father bury something in no longer in possession of your senses? This strange,
the ground, and stabbed him; then thinking the deposit unexpected, terrible accusation has disordered your reason.
might contain some treasure he turned up the ground, and Come, recover."
found me still living. The man carried me to the foundling
The procureur dropped his head; his teeth chattered like
asylum, where I was registered under the number 37. Three
those of a man under a violent attack of fever, and yet he
months afterwards, a woman travelled from Rogliano to
was deadly pale.
Paris to fetch me, and having claimed me as her son, carried
me away. Thus, you see, though born in Paris, I was brought "I am in possession of all my senses, sir," he said; "my body
alone suffers, as you may suppose. I acknowledge myself
434

guilty of all the young man has brought against me, and
from this hour hold myself under the authority of the
procureur who will succeed me."
And as he spoke these words with a hoarse, choking voice,
he staggered towards the door, which was mechanically
opened by a door-keeper. The whole assembly were dumb
with astonishment at the revelation and confession which
had produced a catastrophe so different from that which had
been expected during the last fortnight by the Parisian
world.
"Well," said Beauchamp, "let them now say that drama is
unnatural!"
"Ma foi!" said Chateau-Renaud, "I would rather end my

career like M. de Morcerf; a pistol-shot seems quite
delightful compared with this catastrophe."
"And moreover, it kills," said Beauchamp.
"And to think that I had an idea of marrying his daughter,"
said Debray. "She did well to die, poor girl!"
"The sitting is adjourned, gentlemen," said the president;
"fresh inquiries will be made, and the case will be tried next
session by another magistrate." As for Andrea, who was
calm and more interesting than ever, he left the hall, escorted
by gendarmes, who involuntarily paid him some attention.
"Well, what do you think of this, my fine fellow?" asked
Debray of the sergeant-at-arms, slipping a louis into his
hand. "There will be extenuating circumstances," he replied.

435


CHAPTER 111 EXPIATION


Chapter 111 Expiation

N

otwithstanding the density of the crowd, M. de
Villefort saw it open before him. There is something so
awe-inspiring in great afflictions that even in the worst times
the first emotion of a crowd has generally been to
sympathize with the sufferer in a great catastrophe. Many
people have been assassinated in a tumult, but even
criminals have rarely been insulted during trial. Thus
Villefort passed through the mass of spectators and officers
of the Palais, and withdrew. Though he had acknowledged
his guilt, he was protected by his grief. There are some
situations which men understand by instinct, but which
reason is powerless to explain; in such cases the greatest poet
is he who gives utterance to the most natural and vehement
outburst of sorrow. Those who hear the bitter cry are as
much impressed as if they listened to an entire poem, and
when the sufferer is sincere they are right in regarding his
outburst as sublime.

would the typhus fever, the cholera, the plague! And yet I
have punished her -- I have dared to tell her -- I have -`Repent and die!' But no, she must not die; she shall live, and
with me. We will flee from Paris and go as far as the earth
reaches. I told her of the scaffold; oh, heavens, I forgot that it
awaits me also! How could I pronounce that word? Yes, we
will fly; I will confess all to her, -- I will tell her daily that I
also have committed a crime! -- Oh, what an alliance -- the
tiger and the serpent; worthy wife of such as I am! She must
live that my infamy may diminish hers." And Villefort
dashed open the window in front of the carriage.

"Oh!" he exclaimed, as though a redhot iron were piercing
his heart. During the last hour his own crime had alone been
presented to his mind; now another object, not less terrible,
suddenly presented itself. His wife! He had just acted the
inexorable judge with her, he had condemned her to death,
and she, crushed by remorse, struck with terror, covered
with the shame inspired by the eloquence of his
irreproachable virtue, -- she, a poor, weak woman, without
help or the power of defending herself against his absolute
and supreme will, -- she might at that very moment, perhaps,
be preparing to die! An hour had elapsed since her
condemnation; at that moment, doubtless, she was recalling
all her crimes to her memory; she was asking pardon for her
sins; perhaps she was even writing a letter imploring
forgiveness from her virtuous husband -- a forgiveness she
was purchasing with her death! Villefort again groaned with
anguish and despair. "Ah," he exclaimed, "that woman
became criminal only from associating with me! I carried the
infection of crime with me, and she has caught it as she

wife's room, "nothing is changed here." He then closed the
door of the landing. "No one must disturb us," he said; "I
must speak freely to her, accuse myself, and say" -- he
approached the door, touched the crystal handle, which
yielded to his hand. "Not locked," he cried; "that is well."
And he entered the little room in which Edward slept; for
though the child went to school during the day, his mother
could not allow him to be separated from her at night. With
a single glance Villefort's eye ran through the room. "Not
here," he said; "doubtless she is in her bedroom." He rushed
towards the door, found it bolted, and stopped, shuddering.
"Heloise!" he cried. He fancied he heard the sound of a piece
of furniture being removed. "Heloise!" he repeated.

"Faster, faster!" he cried, in a tone which electrified the
coachman. The horses, impelled by fear, flew towards the
house.

"Yes, yes," repeated Villefort, as he approached his home -"yes, that woman must live; she must repent, and educate
my son, the sole survivor, with the exception of the
It would be difficult to describe the state of stupor in which
indestructible old man, of the wreck of my house. She loves
Villefort left the Palais. Every pulse beat with feverish
him; it was for his sake she has committed these crimes. We
excitement, every nerve was strained, every vein swollen,
ought never to despair of softening the heart of a mother
and every part of his body seemed to suffer distinctly from
who loves her child. She will repent, and no one will know
the rest, thus multiplying his agony a thousand-fold. He
that she has been guilty. The events which have taken place
made his way along the corridors through force of habit; he
in my house, though they now occupy the public mind, will
threw aside his magisterial robe, not out of deference to
be forgotten in time, or if, indeed, a few enemies should
etiquette, but because it was an unbearable burden, a
persist in remembering them, why then I will add them to
veritable garb of Nessus, insatiate in torture. Having
my list of crimes. What will it signify if one, two, or three
staggered as far as the Rue Dauphine, he perceived his
more are added? My wife and child shall escape from this
carriage, awoke his sleeping coachman by opening the door
gulf, carrying treasures with them; she will live and may yet
himself, threw himself on the cushions, and pointed towards
be happy, since her child, in whom all her love is centred,
the Faubourg Saint-Honore; the carriage drove on. The
will be with her. I shall have performed a good action, and
weight of his fallen fortunes seemed suddenly to crush him;
my heart will be lighter." And the procureur breathed more
he could not foresee the consequences; he could not
freely than he had done for some time.
contemplate the future with the indifference of the hardened
criminal who merely faces a contingency already familiar. The carriage stopped at the door of the house. Villefort
God was still in his heart. "God," he murmured, not knowing leaped out of the carriage, and saw that his servants were
what he said, -- "God -- God!" Behind the event that had surprised at his early return; he could read no other
overwhelmed him he saw the hand of God. The carriage expression on their features. Neither of them spoke to him;
rolled rapidly onward. Villefort, while turning restlessly on they merely stood aside to let him pass by, as usual, nothing
the cushions, felt something press against him. He put out more. As he passed by M. Noirtier's room, he perceived two
his hand to remove the object; it was a fan which Madame de figures through the half-open door; but he experienced no
Villefort had left in the carriage; this fan awakened a curiosity to know who was visiting his father: anxiety
recollection which darted through his mind like lightning. carried him on further.
He thought of his wife.
"Come," he said, as he ascended the stairs leading to his

436

"Who is there?" answered the voice of her he sought. He
thought that voice more feeble than usual.
"Open the door!" cried Villefort. "Open; it is I." But
notwithstanding this request, notwithstanding the tone of
anguish in which it was uttered, the door remained closed.

Villefort burst it open with a violent blow. At the entrance of
the room which led to her boudoir, Madame de Villefort was
standing erect, pale, her features contracted, and her eyes
glaring horribly. "Heloise, Heloise!" he said, "what is the
matter? Speak!" The young woman extended her stiff white
hands towards him. "It is done, monsieur," she said with a
rattling noise which seemed to tear her throat. "What more
do you want?" and she fell full length on the floor. Villefort
ran to her and seized her hand, which convulsively clasped a
crystal bottle with a golden stopper. Madame de Villefort
was dead. Villefort, maddened with horror, stepped back to
the threshhold of the door, fixing his eyes on the corpse: "My
son!" he exclaimed suddenly, "where is my son? -- Edward,
Edward!" and he rushed out of the room, still crying,
"Edward, Edward!" The name was pronounced in such a
tone of anguish that the servants ran up.
"Where is my son?" asked Villefort; "let him be removed
from the house, that he may not see" -"Master Edward is not down-stairs, sir," replied the valet.
"Then he must be playing in the garden; go and see."

piercing cry escaped from his breast, and he cried, "Still the
hand of God." The presence of the two victims alarmed him;
he could not bear solitude shared only by two corpses. Until
then he had been sustained by rage, by his strength of mind,
by despair, by the supreme agony which led the Titans to
scale the heavens, and Ajax to defy the gods. He now arose,
his head bowed beneath the weight of grief, and, shaking his
damp, dishevelled hair, he who had never felt compassion
for any one determined to seek his father, that he might have
some one to whom he could relate his misfortunes, -- some
one by whose side he might weep. He descended the little
staircase with which we are acquainted, and entered
Noirtier's room. The old man appeared to be listening
attentively and as affectionately as his infirmities would
allow to the Abbe Busoni, who looked cold and calm, as
usual. Villefort, perceiving the abbe, passed his hand across
his brow. He recollected the call he had made upon him after
the dinner at Auteuil, and then the visit the abbe had himself
paid to his house on the day of Valentine's death. "You here,
sir!" he exclaimed; "do you, then, never appear but to act as
an escort to death?"

"No, sir; Madame de Villefort sent for him half an hour ago;
he went into her room, and has not been down-stairs since."
A cold perspiration burst out on Villefort's brow; his legs
trembled, and his thoughts flew about madly in his brain
like the wheels of a disordered watch. "In Madame de
Villefort's room?" he murmured and slowly returned, with
one hand wiping his forehead, and with the other
supporting himself against the wall. To enter the room he
must again see the body of his unfortunate wife. To call
Edward he must reawaken the echo of that room which now
appeared like a sepulchre; to speak seemed like violating the
silence of the tomb. His tongue was paralyzed in his mouth.

Busoni turned around, and, perceiving the excitement
depicted on the magistrate's face, the savage lustre of his
eyes, he understood that the revelation had been made at the
assizes; but beyond this he was ignorant. "I came to pray
over the body of your daughter."

"Edward!" he stammered -- "Edward!" The child did not
answer. Where, then, could he be, if he had entered his
mother's room and not since returned? He stepped forward.
The corpse of Madame de Villefort was stretched across the
doorway leading to the room in which Edward must be;
those glaring eyes seemed to watch over the threshold, and
the lips bore the stamp of a terrible and mysterious irony.
Through the open door was visible a portion of the boudoir,
containing an upright piano and a blue satin couch. Villefort
stepped forward two or three paces, and beheld his child
lying -- no doubt asleep -- on the sofa. The unhappy man
uttered an exclamation of joy; a ray of light seemed to
penetrate the abyss of despair and darkness. He had only to
step over the corpse, enter the boudoir, take the child in his
arms, and flee far, far away.

"No!" The abbe threw off his wig, shook his head, and his
hair, no longer confined, fell in black masses around his
manly face.

Villefort was no longer the civilized man; he was a tiger hurt
unto death, gnashing his teeth in his wound. He no longer
feared realities, but phantoms. He leaped over the corpse as
if it had been a burning brazier. He took the child in his arms,
embraced him, shook him, called him, but the child made no
response. He pressed his burning lips to the cheeks, but they
were icy cold and pale; he felt the stiffened limbs; he pressed
his hand upon the heart, but it no longer beat, -- the child
was dead. A folded paper fell from Edward's breast. Villefort,
thunderstruck, fell upon his knees; the child dropped from
his arms, and rolled on the floor by the side of its mother. He
picked up the paper, and, recognizing his wife's writing, ran
his eyes rapidly over its contents; it ran as follows: --

"And now why are you here?"
"I come to tell you that you have sufficiently repaid your
debt, and that from this moment I will pray to God to forgive
you, as I do."
"Good heavens!" exclaimed Villefort, stepping back fearfully,
"surely that is not the voice of the Abbe Busoni!"

"It is the face of the Count of Monte Cristo!" exclaimed the
procureur, with a haggard expression.
"You are not exactly right, M. Procureur; you must go farther
back."
"That voice, that voice! -- where did I first hear it?"
"You heard it for the first time at Marseilles, twenty-three
years ago, the day of your marriage with Mademoiselle de
Saint-Meran. Refer to your papers."
"You are not Busoni? -- you are not Monte Cristo? Oh,
heavens -- you are, then, some secret, implacable, and mortal
enemy! I must have wronged you in some way at Marseilles.
Oh, woe to me!"
"Yes; you are now on the right path," said the count, crossing
his arms over his broad chest; "search -- search!"
"But what have I done to you?" exclaimed Villefort, whose
mind was balancing between reason and insanity, in that
cloud which is neither a dream nor reality; "what have I
done to you? Tell me, then! Speak!"
"You condemned me to a horrible, tedious death; you killed
my father; you deprived me of liberty, of love, and
happiness."
"Who are you, then? Who are you?"

"You know that I was a good mother, since it was for my "I am the spectre of a wretch you buried in the dungeons of
son's sake I became criminal. A good mother cannot depart the Chateau d'If. God gave that spectre the form of the Count
without her son."
of Monte Cristo when he at length issued from his tomb,
Villefort could not believe his eyes, -- he could not believe enriched him with gold and diamonds, and led him to you!"
his reason; he dragged himself towards the child's body, and "Ah, I recognize you -- I recognize you!" exclaimed the king's
examined it as a lioness contemplates its dead cub. Then a
437


CHAPTER 111 EXPIATION

attorney; "you are" -"I am Edmond Dantes!"
"You are Edmond Dantes," cried Villefort, seizing the count
by the wrist; "then come here!" And up the stairs he dragged
Monte Cristo; who, ignorant of what had happened,
followed him in astonishment, foreseeing some new
catastrophe. "There, Edmond Dantes!" he said, pointing to
the bodies of his wife and child, "see, are you well avenged?"
Monte Cristo became pale at this horrible sight; he felt that
he had passed beyond the bounds of vengeance, and that he
could no longer say, "God is for and with me." With an
expression of indescribable anguish he threw himself upon
the body of the child, reopened its eyes, felt its pulse, and
then rushed with him into Valentine's room, of which he
double-locked the door. "My child," cried Villefort, "he
carries away the body of my child! Oh, curses, woe, death to
you!" and he tried to follow Monte Cristo; but as though in a
dream he was transfixed to the spot, -- his eyes glared as
though they were starting through the sockets; he griped the
flesh on his chest until his nails were stained with blood; the
veins of his temples swelled and boiled as though they
would burst their narrow boundary, and deluge his brain
with living fire. This lasted several minutes, until the
frightful overturn of reason was accomplished; then uttering
a loud cry followed by a burst of laughter, he rushed down
the stairs.
A quarter of an hour afterwards the door of Valentine's room
opened, and Monte Cristo reappeared. Pale, with a dull eye
and heavy heart, all the noble features of that face, usually so
calm and serene, were overcast by grief. In his arms he held
the child, whom no skill had been able to recall to life.
Bending on one knee, he placed it reverently by the side of

438

its mother, with its head upon her breast. Then, rising, he
went out, and meeting a servant on the stairs, he asked,
"Where is M. de Villefort?"
The servant, instead of answering, pointed to the garden.
Monte Cristo ran down the steps, and advancing towards
the spot designated beheld Villefort, encircled by his
servants, with a spade in his hand, and digging the earth
with fury. "It is not here!" he cried. "It is not here!" And then
he moved farther on, and began again to dig.
Monte Cristo approached him, and said in a low voice, with
an expression almost humble, "Sir, you have indeed lost a
son; but" -Villefort interrupted him; he had neither listened nor heard.
"Oh, I will find it," he cried; "you may pretend he is not here,
but I will find him, though I dig forever!" Monte Cristo drew
back in horror. "Oh," he said, "he is mad!" And as though he
feared that the walls of the accursed house would crumble
around him, he rushed into the street, for the first time
doubting whether he had the right to do as he had done. "Oh,
enough of this, -- enough of this," he cried; "let me save the
last." On entering his house, he met Morrel, who wandered
about like a ghost awaiting the heavenly mandate for return
to the tomb. "Prepare yourself, Maximilian," he said with a
smile; "we leave Paris to-morrow."
"Have you nothing more to do there?" asked Morrel.
"No," replied Monte Cristo; "God grant I may not have done
too much already."
The next day they indeed left, accompanied only by
Baptistin. Haidee had taken away Ali, and Bertuccio
remained with Noirtier.


Chapter 112 The Departure

T

he recent event formed the theme of conversation
throughout all Paris. Emmanuel and his wife conversed
with natural astonishment in their little apartment in the Rue
Meslay upon the three successive, sudden, and most
unexpected catastrophes of Morcerf, Danglars, and Villefort.
Maximilian, who was paying them a visit, listened to their
conversation, or rather was present at it, plunged in his
accustomed state of apathy. "Indeed," said Julie, "might we
not almost fancy, Emmanuel, that those people, so rich, so
happy but yesterday, had forgotten in their prosperity that
an evil genius -- like the wicked fairies in Perrault's stories
who present themselves unbidden at a wedding or baptism
-- hovered over them, and appeared all at once to revenge
himself for their fatal neglect?"

"I will undertake to divert him," replied the count.

"What a dire misfortune!" said Emmanuel, thinking of
Morcerf and Danglars.

"Good," said Monte Cristo, smiling; "in these prompt
arrangements we recognize the order of a well-disciplined
soldier."

"What dreadful sufferings!" said Julie, remembering
Valentine, but whom, with a delicacy natural to women, she
did not name before her brother.

"I am ready to accompany you, sir," said Maximilian. "Adieu,
my kind friends! Emmanuel -- Julie -- farewell!"
"How farewell?" exclaimed Julie; "do you leave us thus, so
suddenly, without any preparations for your journey,
without even a passport?"
"Needless delays but increase the grief of parting," said
Monte Cristo, "and Maximilian has doubtless provided
himself with everything requisite; at least, I advised him to
do so."
"I have a passport, and my clothes are ready packed," said
Morrel in his tranquil but mournful manner.

"And you leave us," said Julie, "at a moment's warning? you
do not give us a day -- no, not even an hour before your
departure?"

"If the Supreme Being has directed the fatal blow," said
Emmanuel, "it must be that he in his great goodness has "My carriage is at the door, madame, and I must be in Rome
perceived nothing in the past lives of these people to merit in five days."
mitigation of their awful punishment."
"But does Maximilian go to Rome?" exclaimed Emmanuel.
"Do you not form a very rash judgment, Emmanuel?" said
Julie. "When my father, with a pistol in his hand, was once
on the point of committing suicide, had any one then said,
`This man deserves his misery,' would not that person have
been deceived?"
"Yes; but your father was not allowed to fall. A being was
commissioned to arrest the fatal hand of death about to
descend on him."
Emmanuel had scarcely uttered these words when the sound
of the bell was heard, the well-known signal given by the
porter that a visitor had arrived. Nearly at the same instant
the door was opened and the Count of Monte Cristo
appeared on the threshold. The young people uttered a cry
of joy, while Maximilian raised his head, but let it fall again
immediately. "Maximilian," said the count, without
appearing to notice the different impressions which his
presence produced on the little circle, "I come to seek you."
"To seek me?" repeated Morrel, as if awakening from a
dream.
"Yes," said Monte Cristo; "has it not been agreed that I
should take you with me, and did I not tell you yesterday to
prepare for departure?"

"I am going wherever it may please the count to take me,"
said Morrel, with a smile full of grief; "I am under his orders
for the next month."
"Oh, heavens, how strangely he expresses himself, count!"
said Julie.
"Maximilian goes with me," said the count, in his kindest
and most persuasive manner; "therefore do not make
yourself uneasy on your brother's account."
"Once more farewell, my dear sister; Emmanuel, adieu!"
Morrel repeated.
"His carelessness and indifference touch me to the heart,"
said Julie. "Oh, Maximilian, Maximilian, you are certainly
concealing something from us."
"Pshaw!" said Monte Cristo, "you will see him return to you
gay, smiling, and joyful."
Maximilian cast a look of disdain, almost of anger, on the
count.
"We must leave you," said Monte Cristo.
"Before you quit us, count," said Julie, "will you permit us to
express to you all that the other day" --

"Madame," interrupted the count, taking her two hands in
his, "all that you could say in words would never express
what I read in your eyes; the thoughts of your heart are fully
"Whither are you going, count?" asked Julie.
understood by mine. Like benefactors in romances, I should
have left you without seeing you again, but that would have
"In the first instance to Marseilles, madame."
been a virtue beyond my strength, because I am a weak and
"To Marseilles!" exclaimed the young couple.
vain man, fond of the tender, kind, and thankful glances of
"Yes, and I take your brother with me."
my fellow-creatures. On the eve of departure I carry my
"Oh, count." said Julie, "will you restore him to us cured of egotism so far as to say, `Do not forget me, my kind friends,
his melancholy?" -- Morrel turned away to conceal the for probably you will never see me again.'"
confusion of his countenance.
"Never see you again?" exclaimed Emmanuel, while two
"You perceive, then, that he is not happy?" said the count. large tears rolled down Julie's cheeks, "never behold you
"Yes," replied the young woman; "and fear much that he again? It is not a man, then, but some angel that leaves us,
and this angel is on the point of returning to heaven after
finds our home but a dull one."
"I am ready," said Maximilian; "I came expressly to wish
them farewell."

439


CHAPTER 112 THE DEPARTURE

having appeared on earth to do good."

thy palpitating bosom that I have found that which I sought;
like a patient miner, I have dug deep into thy very entrails to
"Say not so," quickly returned Monte Cristo -- "say not so,
root out evil thence. Now my work is accomplished, my
my friends; angels never err, celestial beings remain where
mission is terminated, now thou canst neither afford me pain
they wish to be. Fate is not more powerful than they; it is
nor pleasure. Adieu, Paris, adieu!"
they who, on the contrary, overcome fate. No, Emmanuel, I
am but a man, and your admiration is as unmerited as your His look wandered over the vast plain like that of some
words are sacrilegious." And pressing his lips on the hand of genius of the night; he passed his hand over his brow, got
Julie, who rushed into his arms, he extended his other hand into the carriage, the door was closed on him, and the
to Emmanuel; then tearing himself from this abode of peace vehicle quickly disappeared down the other side of the hill
and happiness, he made a sign to Maximilian, who followed in a whirlwind of noise and dust.
him passively, with the indifference which had been
Ten leagues were passed and not a single word was uttered.
perceptible in him ever since the death of Valentine had so
stunned him. "Restore my brother to peace and happiness," Morrel was dreaming, and Monte Cristo was looking at the
whispered Julie to Monte Cristo. And the count pressed her dreamer.
hand in reply, as he had done eleven years before on the "Morrel," said the count to him at length, "do you repent
staircase leading to Morrel's study.
having followed me?"
"You still confide, then, in Sinbad the Sailor?" asked he,
smiling.
"Oh, yes," was the ready answer.

"No, count; but to leave Paris" -"If I thought happiness might await you in Paris, Morrel, I
would have left you there."

"Well, then, sleep in peace, and put your trust in heaven." As
we have before said, the postchaise was waiting; four
powerful horses were already pawing the ground with
impatience, while Ali, apparently just arrived from a long
walk, was standing at the foot of the steps, his face bathed in
perspiration. "Well," asked the count in Arabic, "have you
been to see the old man?" Ali made a sign in the affirmative.

"Valentine reposes within the walls of Paris, and to leave
Paris is like losing her a second time."

"Good; he accepts," said Monte Cristo. "Now let us go."

"It is the way of weakened minds to see everything through
a black cloud. The soul forms its own horizons; your soul is
darkened, and consequently the sky of the future appears
stormy and unpromising."

"Maximilian," said the count, "the friends that we have lost
do not repose in the bosom of the earth, but are buried deep
in our hearts, and it has been thus ordained that we may
always be accompanied by them. I have two friends, who in
this way never depart from me; the one who gave me being,
"And have you placed the letter before him, as I ordered you and the other who conferred knowledge and intelligence on
to do?"
me. Their spirits live in me. I consult them when doubtful,
The slave respectfully signalized that he had. "And what did and if I ever do any good, it is due to their beneficent
he say, or rather do?" Ali placed himself in the light, so that counsels. Listen to the voice of your heart, Morrel, and ask it
his master might see him distinctly, and then imitating in his whether you ought to preserve this melancholy exterior
intelligent manner the countenance of the old man, he closed towards me."
his eyes, as Noirtier was in the custom of doing when saying "My friend," said Maximilian, "the voice of my heart is very
"Yes."
sorrowful, and promises me nothing but misfortune."
These words had scarcely escaped him, when the carriage
was on its way, and the feet of the horses struck a shower of
sparks from the pavement. Maximilian settled himself in his
corner without uttering a word. Half an hour had passed
when the carriage stopped suddenly; the count had just
pulled the silken check-string, which was fastened to Ali's
finger. The Nubian immediately descended and opened the
carriage door. It was a lovely starlight night -- they had just
reached the top of the hill Villejuif, from whence Paris
appears like a sombre sea tossing its millions of phosphoric
waves into light -- waves indeed more noisy, more
passionate, more changeable, more furious, more greedy,
than those of the tempestuous ocean, -- waves which never
rest as those of the sea sometimes do, -- waves ever dashing,
ever foaming, ever ingulfing what falls within their grasp.
The count stood alone, and at a sign from his hand, the
carriage went on for a short distance. With folded arms, he
gazed for some time upon the great city. When he had fixed
his piercing look on this modern Babylon, which equally
engages the contemplation of the religious enthusiast, the
materialist, and the scoffer, -- "Great city," murmured he,
inclining his head, and joining his hands as if in prayer, "less
than six months have elapsed since first I entered thy gates. I
believe that the Spirit of God led my steps to thee and that he
also enables me to quit thee in triumph; the secret cause of
my presence within thy walls I have confided alone to him
who only has had the power to read my heart. God only
knows that I retire from thee without pride or hatred, but not
without many regrets; he only knows that the power
confided to me has never been made subservient to my
personal good or to any useless cause. Oh, great city, it is in
440

"That may possibly be true," said Maximilian, and he again
subsided into his thoughtful mood.
The journey was performed with that marvellous rapidity
which the unlimited power of the count ever commanded.
Towns fled from them like shadows on their path, and trees
shaken by the first winds of autumn seemed like giants
madly rushing on to meet them, and retreating as rapidly
when once reached. The following morning they arrived at
Chalons, where the count's steamboat waited for them.
Without the loss of an instant, the carriage was placed on
board and the two travellers embarked without delay. The
boat was built for speed; her two paddle-wheels were like
two wings with which she skimmed the water like a bird.
Morrel was not insensible to that sensation of delight which
is generally experienced in passing rapidly through the air,
and the wind which occasionally raised the hair from his
forehead seemed on the point of dispelling momentarily the
clouds collected there.
As the distance increased between the travellers and Paris,
almost superhuman serenity appeared to surround the count;
he might have been taken for an exile about to revisit his
native land. Ere long Marseilles presented herself to view, -Marseilles, white, fervid, full of life and energy, -- Marseilles,
the younger sister of Tyre and Carthage, the successor to
them in the empire of the Mediterranean, -- Marseilles, old,
yet always young. Powerful memories were stirred within
them by the sight of the round tower, Fort Saint-Nicolas, the

City Hall designed by Puget,* the port with its brick quays,
where they had both played in childhood, and it was with
one accord that they stopped on the Cannebiere. A vessel
was setting sail for Algiers, on board of which the bustle
usually attending departure prevailed. The passengers and
their relations crowded on the deck, friends taking a tender
but sorrowful leave of each other, some weeping, others
noisy in their grief, the whole forming a spectacle that might
be exciting even to those who witnessed similar sights daily,
but which had no power to disturb the current of thought
that had taken possession of the mind of Maximilian from
the moment he had set foot on the broad pavement of the
quay.

occupied merely the garret, while the whole house was now
placed at the command of Mercedes by the count.

again when the rains came on. The house, with all its
crumbling antiquity and apparent misery, was yet cheerful
and picturesque, and was the same that old Dantes formerly
inhabited -- the only difference being that the old man

"Hate you, blame you -- you, Edmond! Hate, reproach, the
man that has spared my son's life! For was it not your fatal
and sanguinary intention to destroy that son of whom M. de
Morcerf was so proud? Oh, look at me closely, and discover

The woman whom the count had seen leave the ship with so
much regret entered this house; she had scarcely closed the
door after her when Monte Cristo appeared at the corner of a
street, so that he found and lost her again almost at the same
instant. The worn out steps were old acquaintances of his; he
knew better than any one else how to open that
weather-beaten door with the large headed nail which
served to raise the latch within. He entered without
knocking, or giving any other intimation of his presence, as
if he had been a friend or the master of the place. At the end
of a passage paved with bricks, was a little garden, bathed in
* Pierre Puget, the sculptor-architect, was born at Marseilles sunshine, and rich in warmth and light. In this garden
in 1622.
Mercedes had found, at the place indicated by the count, the
sum of money which he, through a sense of delicacy, had
"Here," said he, leaning heavily on the arm of Monte Cristo,
described as having been placed there twenty-four years
-- "here is the spot where my father stopped, when the
previously. The trees of the garden were easily seen from the
Pharaon entered the port; it was here that the good old man,
steps of the street-door. Monte Cristo, on stepping into the
whom you saved from death and dishonor, threw himself
house, heard a sigh that was almost a deep sob; he looked in
into my arms. I yet feel his warm tears on my face, and his
the direction whence it came, and there under an arbor of
were not the only tears shed, for many who witnessed our
Virginia jessamine,* with its thick foliage and beautiful long
meeting wept also." Monte Cristo gently smiled and said, -purple flowers, he saw Mercedes seated, with her head
"I was there;" at the same time pointing to the corner of a
bowed, and weeping bitterly. She had raised her veil, and
street. As he spoke, and in the very direction he indicated, a
with her face hidden by her hands was giving free scope to
groan, expressive of bitter grief, was heard, and a woman
the sighs and tears which had been so long restrained by the
was seen waving her hand to a passenger on board the
presence of her son. Monte Cristo advanced a few steps,
vessel about to sail. Monte Cristo looked at her with an
which were heard on the gravel. Mercedes raised her head,
emotion that must have been remarked by Morrel had not
and uttered a cry of terror on beholding a man before her.
his eyes been fixed on the vessel.
* The Carolina -- not Virginia -- jessamine, gelsemium
"Oh, heavens!" exclaimed Morrel, "I do not deceive myself -sempervirens (properly speaking not a jessamine at all) has
that young man who is waving his hat, that youth in the
yellow blossoms. The reference is no doubt to the Wistaria
uniform of a lieutenant, is Albert de Morcerf!"
frutescens. -- Ed.
"Yes," said Monte Cristo, "I recognized him."
"Madame," said the count, "it is no longer in my power to
"How so? -- you were looking the other way." the count restore you to happiness, but I offer you consolation; will
smiled, as he was in the habit of doing when he did not want you deign to accept it as coming from a friend?"
to make any reply, and he again turned towards the veiled
"I am, indeed, most wretched," replied Mercedes. "Alone in
woman, who soon disappeared at the corner of the street.
the world, I had but my son, and he has left me!"
Turning to his friend, -- "Dear Maximilian," said the count,
"have you nothing to do in this land?"
"He possesses a noble heart, madame," replied the count,
"and he has acted rightly. He feels that every man owes a
"I have to weep over the grave of my father," replied Morrel
tribute to his country; some contribute their talents, others
in a broken voice.
their industry; these devote their blood, those their nightly
"Well, then, go, -- wait for me there, and I will soon join labors, to the same cause. Had he remained with you, his life
you."
must have become a hateful burden, nor would he have
participated in your griefs. He will increase in strength and
"You leave me, then?"
honor by struggling with adversity, which he will convert
"Yes; I also have a pious visit to pay."
into prosperity. Leave him to build up the future for you,
Morrel allowed his hand to fall into that which the count and I venture to say you will confide it to safe hands."
extended to him; then with an inexpressibly sorrowful "Oh," replied the wretched woman, mournfully shaking her
inclination of the head he quitted the count and bent his head, "the prosperity of which you speak, and which, from
steps to the east of the city. Monte Cristo remained on the the bottom of my heart, I pray God in his mercy to grant him,
same spot until Maximilian was out of sight; he then walked I can never enjoy. The bitter cup of adversity has been
slowly towards the Allees de Meillan to seek out a small drained by me to the very dregs, and I feel that the grave is
house with which our readers were made familiar at the not far distant. You have acted kindly, count, in bringing me
beginning of this story. It yet stood, under the shade of the back to the place where I have enjoyed so much bliss. I ought
fine avenue of lime-trees, which forms one of the most to meet death on the same spot where happiness was once
frequent walks of the idlers of Marseilles, covered by an all my own."
immense vine, which spreads its aged and blackened
branches over the stone front, burnt yellow by the ardent "Alas," said Monte Cristo, "your words sear and embitter my
sun of the south. Two stone steps worn away by the friction heart, the more so as you have every reason to hate me. I
of many feet led to the door, which was made of three have been the cause of all your misfortunes; but why do you
planks; the door had never been painted or varnished, so pity, instead of blaming me? You render me still more
great cracks yawned in it during the dry season to close unhappy" --

441


CHAPTER 112 THE DEPARTURE

if you can even the semblance of a reproach in me." The
count looked up and fixed his eyes on Mercedes, who arose
partly from her seat and extended both her hands towards
him. "Oh, look at me," continued she, with a feeling of
profound melancholy, "my eyes no longer dazzle by their
brilliancy, for the time has long fled since I used to smile on
Edmond Dantes, who anxiously looked out for me from the
window of yonder garret, then inhabited by his old father.
Years of grief have created an abyss between those days and
the present. I neither reproach you nor hate you, my friend.
Oh, no, Edmond, it is myself that I blame, myself that I hate!
Oh, miserable creature that I am!" cried she, clasping her
hands, and raising her eyes to heaven. "I once possessed
piety, innocence, and love, the three ingredients of the
happiness of angels, and now what am I?" Monte Cristo
approached her, and silently took her hand. "No," said she,
withdrawing it gently -- "no, my friend, touch me not. You
have spared me, yet of all those who have fallen under your
vengeance I was the most guilty. They were influenced by
hatred, by avarice, and by self-love; but I was base, and for
want of courage acted against my judgment. Nay, do not
press my hand, Edmond; you are thinking, I am sure, of
some kind speech to console me, but do not utter it to me,
reserve it for others more worthy of your kindness. See" (and
she exposed her face completely to view) -- "see, misfortune
has silvered my hair, my eyes have shed so many tears that
they are encircled by a rim of purple, and my brow is
wrinkled. You, Edmond, on the contrary, -- you are still
young, handsome, dignified; it is because you have had faith;
because you have had strength, because you have had trust
in God, and God has sustained you. But as for me, I have
been a coward; I have denied God and he has abandoned
me."

sufferings, the abandonment of all those who loved me, the
persecution of those who did not know me, formed the trials
of my youth; when suddenly, from captivity, solitude,
misery, I was restored to light and liberty, and became the
possessor of a fortune so brilliant, so unbounded, so
unheard-of, that I must have been blind not to be conscious
that God had endowed me with it to work out his own great
designs. From that time I looked upon this fortune as
something confided to me for an especial purpose. Not a
thought was given to a life which you once, Mercedes, had
the power to render blissful; not one hour of peaceful calm
was mine; but I felt myself driven on like an exterminating
angel. Like adventurous captains about to embark on some
enterprise full of danger, I laid in my provisions, I loaded my
weapons, I collected every means of attack and defence; I
inured my body to the most violent exercises, my soul to the
bitterest trials; I taught my arm to slay, my eyes to behold
excruciating sufferings, and my mouth to smile at the most
horrid spectacles. Good-natured, confiding, and forgiving as
I had been, I became revengeful, cunning, and wicked, or
rather, immovable as fate. Then I launched out into the path
that was opened to me. I overcame every obstacle, and
reached the goal; but woe to those who stood in my
pathway!"

"No, Mercedes," said Monte Cristo, "no; you judge yourself
with too much severity. You are a noble-minded woman,
and it was your grief that disarmed me. Still I was but an
agent, led on by an invisible and offended Deity, who chose
not to withhold the fatal blow that I was destined to hurl. I
take that God to witness, at whose feet I have prostrated
myself daily for the last ten years, that I would have
sacrificed my life to you, and with my life the projects that
were indissolubly linked with it. But -- and I say it with
some pride, Mercedes -- God needed me, and I lived.
Examine the past and the present, and endeavor to dive into
futurity, and then say whether I am not a divine instrument.
The most dreadful misfortunes, the most frightful
442

possibly confer."

"Enough," said Mercedes; "enough, Edmond! Believe me,
that she who alone recognized you has been the only one to
comprehend you; and had she crossed your path, and you
had crushed her like glass, still, Edmond, still she must have
admired you! Like the gulf between me and the past, there is
an abyss between you, Edmond, and the rest of mankind;
and I tell you freely that the comparison I draw between you
and other men will ever be one of my greatest tortures. No,
there is nothing in the world to resemble you in worth and
Mercedes burst into tears; her woman's heart was breaking goodness! But we must say farewell, Edmond, and let us
under its load of memories. Monte Cristo took her hand and part."
imprinted a kiss on it; but she herself felt that it was a kiss of
"Before I leave you, Mercedes, have you no request to
no greater warmth than he would have bestowed on the
make?" said the count.
hand of some marble statue of a saint. "It often happens,"
continued she, "that a first fault destroys the prospects of a "I desire but one thing in this world, Edmond, -- the
whole life. I believed you dead; why did I survive you? happiness of my son."
What good has it done me to mourn for you eternally in the "Pray to the Almighty to spare his life, and I will take upon
secret recesses of my heart? -- only to make a woman of myself to promote his happiness."
thirty-nine look like a woman of fifty. Why, having
recognized you, and I the only one to do so -- why was I able "Thank you, Edmond."
to save my son alone? Ought I not also to have rescued the "But have you no request to make for yourself, Mercedes?"
man that I had accepted for a husband, guilty though he
"For myself I want nothing. I live, as it were, between two
were? Yet I let him die! What do I say? Oh, merciful heavens,
graves. One is that of Edmond Dantes, lost to me long, long
was I not accessory to his death by my supine insensibility,
since. He had my love! That word ill becomes my faded lip
by my contempt for him, not remembering, or not willing to
now, but it is a memory dear to my heart, and one that I
remember, that it was for my sake he had become a traitor
would not lose for all that the world contains. The other
and a perjurer? In what am I benefited by accompanying my
grave is that of the man who met his death from the hand of
son so far, since I now abandon him, and allow him to
Edmond Dantes. I approve of the deed, but I must pray for
depart alone to the baneful climate of Africa? Oh, I have
the dead."
been base, cowardly, I tell you; I have abjured my affections,
and like all renegades I am of evil omen to those who "Your son shall be happy, Mercedes," repeated the count.
surround me!"
"Then I shall enjoy as much happiness as this world can
"But what are your intentions?"
"To say that I shall live here, like the Mercedes of other times,
gaining my bread by labor, would not be true, nor would
you believe me. I have no longer the strength to do anything
but to spend my days in prayer. However, I shall have no
occasion to work, for the little sum of money buried by you,
and which I found in the place you mentioned, will be
sufficient to maintain me. Rumor will probably be busy
respecting me, my occupations, my manner of living -- that
will signify but little."

"Mercedes," said the count, "I do not say it to blame you, but
you made an unnecessary sacrifice in relinquishing the
whole of the fortune amassed by M. de Morcerf; half of it at
least by right belonged to you, in virtue of your vigilance
and economy."
"I perceive what you are intending to propose to me; but I
cannot accept it, Edmond -- my son would not permit it."

It is not so we should evince our resignation to the will of
heaven; on the contrary, we are all free agents."
"Alas!" exclaimed Mercedes, "if it were so, if I possessed
free-will, but without the power to render that will
efficacious, it would drive me to despair." Monte Cristo
dropped his head and shrank from the vehemence of her
grief. "Will you not even say you will see me again?" he
asked.

"Nothing shall be done without the full approbation of
Albert de Morcerf. I will make myself acquainted with his "On the contrary, we shall meet again," said Mercedes,
intentions and will submit to them. But if he be willing to pointing to heaven with solemnity. "I tell you so to prove to
accept my offers, will you oppose them?"
you that I still hope." And after pressing her own trembling
hand upon that of the count, Mercedes rushed up the stairs
"You well know, Edmond, that I am no longer a reasoning
and disappeared. Monte Cristo slowly left the house and
creature; I have no will, unless it be the will never to decide.
turned towards the quay. But Mercedes did not witness his
I have been so overwhelmed by the many storms that have
departure, although she was seated at the little window of
broken over my head, that I am become passive in the hands
the room which had been occupied by old Dantes. Her eyes
of the Almighty, like a sparrow in the talons of an eagle. I
were straining to see the ship which was carrying her son
live, because it is not ordained for me to die. If succor be sent
over the vast sea; but still her voice involuntarily murmured
to me, I will accept it."
softly, "Edmond, Edmond, Edmond!"
"Ah, madame," said Monte Cristo, "you should not talk thus!

443


CHAPTER 113 THE PAST


Chapter 113 The Past

T

he count departed with a sad heart from the house in
which he had left Mercedes, probably never to behold
her again. Since the death of little Edward a great change
had taken place in Monte Cristo. Having reached the summit
of his vengeance by a long and tortuous path, he saw an
abyss of doubt yawning before him. More than this, the
conversation which had just taken place between Mercedes
and himself had awakened so many recollections in his heart
that he felt it necessary to combat with them. A man of the
count's temperament could not long indulge in that
melancholy which can exist in common minds, but which
destroys superior ones. He thought he must have made an
error in his calculations if he now found cause to blame
himself.

could think only of this terrible voyage, the details of which
were one by one recalled to his memory. The solitary light
burning at the Catalans; that first sight of the Chateau d'If,
which told him whither they were leading him; the struggle
with the gendarmes when he wished to throw himself
overboard; his despair when he found himself vanquished,
and the sensation when the muzzle of the carbine touched
his forehead -- all these were brought before him in vivid
and frightful reality. Like the streams which the heat of the
summer has dried up, and which after the autumnal storms
gradually begin oozing drop by drop, so did the count feel
his heart gradually fill with the bitterness which formerly
nearly overwhelmed Edmond Dantes. Clear sky,
swift-flitting boats, and brilliant sunshine disappeared; the
heavens were hung with black, and the gigantic structure of
"I cannot have deceived myself," he said; "I must look upon
the Chateau d'If seemed like the phantom of a mortal enemy.
the past in a false light. What!" he continued, "can I have
As they reached the shore, the count instinctively shrunk to
been following a false path? -- can the end which I proposed
the extreme end of the boat, and the owner was obliged to
be a mistaken end? -- can one hour have sufficed to prove to
call out, in his sweetest tone of voice, "Sir, we are at the
an architect that the work upon which he founded all his
landing."
hopes was an impossible, if not a sacrilegious, undertaking?
I cannot reconcile myself to this idea -- it would madden me. Monte Cristo remembered that on that very spot, on the
The reason why I am now dissatisfied is that I have not a same rock, he had been violently dragged by the guards,
clear appreciation of the past. The past, like the country who forced him to ascend the slope at the points of their
through which we walk, becomes indistinct as we advance. bayonets. The journey had seemed very long to Dantes, but
My position is like that of a person wounded in a dream; he Monte Cristo found it equally short. Each stroke of the oar
feels the wound, though he cannot recollect when he seemed to awaken a new throng of ideas, which sprang up
received it. Come, then, thou regenerate man, thou with the flying spray of the sea.
extravagant prodigal, thou awakened sleeper, thou
There had been no prisoners confined in the Chateau d'If
all-powerful visionary, thou invincible millionaire, -- once
since the revolution of July; it was only inhabited by a guard,
again review thy past life of starvation and wretchedness,
kept there for the prevention of smuggling. A concierge
revisit the scenes where fate and misfortune conducted, and
waited at the door to exhibit to visitors this monument of
where despair received thee. Too many diamonds, too much
curiosity, once a scene of terror. The count inquired whether
gold and splendor, are now reflected by the mirror in which
any of the ancient jailers were still there; but they had all
Monte Cristo seeks to behold Dantes. Hide thy diamonds,
been pensioned, or had passed on to some other
bury thy gold, shroud thy splendor, exchange riches for
employment. The concierge who attended him had only
poverty, liberty for a prison, a living body for a corpse!" As
been there since 1830. He visited his own dungeon. He again
he thus reasoned, Monte Cristo walked down the Rue de la
beheld the dull light vainly endeavoring to penetrate the
Caisserie. It was the same through which, twenty-four years
narrow opening. His eyes rested upon the spot where had
ago, he had been conducted by a silent and nocturnal guard;
stood his bed, since then removed, and behind the bed the
the houses, to-day so smiling and animated, were on that
new stones indicated where the breach made by the Abbe
night dark, mute, and closed. "And yet they were the same,"
Faria had been. Monte Cristo felt his limbs tremble; he seated
murmured Monte Cristo, "only now it is broad daylight
himself upon a log of wood.
instead of night; it is the sun which brightens the place, and
"Are there any stories connected with this prison besides the
makes it appear so cheerful."
one relating to the poisoning of Mirabeau?" asked the count;
He proceeded towards the quay by the Rue Saint-Laurent,
"are there any traditions respecting these dismal abodes, -- in
and advanced to the Consigne; it was the point where he had
which it is difficult to believe men can ever have imprisoned
embarked. A pleasure-boat with striped awning was going
their fellow-creatures?"
by. Monte Cristo called the owner, who immediately rowed
up to him with the eagerness of a boatman hoping for a good "Yes, sir; indeed, the jailer Antoine told me one connected
fare. The weather was magnificent, and the excursion a treat. with this very dungeon."
The sun, red and flaming, was sinking into the embrace of
the welcoming ocean. The sea, smooth as crystal, was now
and then disturbed by the leaping of fish, which were
pursued by some unseen enemy and sought for safety in
another element; while on the extreme verge of the horizon
might be seen the fishermen's boats, white and graceful as
the sea-gull, or the merchant vessels bound for Corsica or
Spain.

Monte Cristo shuddered; Antoine had been his jailer. He had
almost forgotten his name and face, but at the mention of the
name he recalled his person as he used to see it, the face
encircled by a beard, wearing the brown jacket, the bunch of
keys, the jingling of which he still seemed to hear. The count
turned around, and fancied he saw him in the corridor,
rendered still darker by the torch carried by the concierge.
"Would you like to hear the story, sir?"

But notwithstanding the serene sky, the gracefully formed
boats, and the golden light in which the whole scene was
bathed, the Count of Monte Cristo, wrapped in his cloak,

"Yes; relate it," said Monte Cristo, pressing his hand to his
heart to still its violent beatings; he felt afraid of hearing his
own history.

444

"This dungeon," said the concierge, "was, it appears, some
time ago occupied by a very dangerous prisoner, the more so
since he was full of industry. Another person was confined
in the Chateau at the same time, but he was not wicked, he
was only a poor mad priest."

things must have happened; he must either have fallen flat,
in which case the blow, from a height of ninety feet, must
have killed him instantly, or he must have fallen upright,
and then the weight would have dragged him to the bottom,
where he remained -- poor fellow!"

"Ah, indeed? -- mad!" repeated Monte Cristo; "and what was "Then you pity him?" said the count.
his mania?"
"Ma foi, yes; though he was in his own element."
"He offered millions to any one who would set him at
"What do you mean?"
liberty."
"The report was that he had been a naval officer, who had
Monte Cristo raised his eyes, but he could not see the
been confined for plotting with the Bonapartists."
heavens; there was a stone veil between him and the
firmament. He thought that there had been no less thick a "Great is truth," muttered the count, "fire cannot burn, nor
veil before the eyes of those to whom Faria offered the water drown it! Thus the poor sailor lives in the recollection
of those who narrate his history; his terrible story is recited
treasures. "Could the prisoners see each other?" he asked.
in the chimney-corner, and a shudder is felt at the
"Oh, no, sir, it was expressly forbidden; but they eluded the
description of his transit through the air to be swallowed by
vigilance of the guards, and made a passage from one
the deep." Then, the count added aloud, "Was his name ever
dungeon to the other."
known?"
"And which of them made this passage?"
"Oh, yes; but only as No. 34."
"Oh, it must have been the young man, certainly, for he was
"Oh, Villefort, Villefort," murmured the count, "this scene
strong and industrious, while the abbe was aged and weak;
must often have haunted thy sleepless hours!"
besides, his mind was too vacillating to allow him to carry
"Do you wish to see anything more, sir?" said the concierge.
out an idea."
"Blind fools!" murmured the count.

"Yes, especially if you will show me the poor abbe's room."

"However, be that as it may, the young man made a tunnel,
how or by what means no one knows; but he made it, and
there is the evidence yet remaining of his work. Do you see
it?" and the man held the torch to the wall.

"Ah -- No. 27."

"Ah, yes; I see," said the count, in a voice hoarse from
emotion.

"Come, sir."

"He carried off the corpse, which he placed in his own bed
with its face to the wall; then he entered the empty dungeon,
closed the entrance, and slipped into the sack which had
contained the dead body. Did you ever hear of such an
idea?" Monte Cristo closed his eyes, and seemed again to
experience all the sensations he had felt when the coarse
canvas, yet moist with the cold dews of death, had touched
his face. The jailer continued: "Now this was his project. He
fancied that they buried the dead at the Chateau d'If, and
imagining they would not expend much labor on the grave
of a prisoner, he calculated on raising the earth with his
shoulders, but unfortunately their arrangements at the
Chateau frustrated his projects. They never buried the dead;
they merely attached a heavy cannon-ball to the feet, and
then threw them into the sea. This is what was done. The
young man was thrown from the top of the rock; the corpse
was found on the bed next day, and the whole truth was
guessed, for the men who performed the office then
mentioned what they had not dared to speak of before, that
at the moment the corpse was thrown into the deep, they
heard a shriek, which was almost immediately stifled by the
water in which it disappeared." The count breathed with
difficulty; the cold drops ran down his forehead, and his
heart was full of anguish.

"I will leave you the torch, sir."

"Yes; No. 27." repeated the count, who seemed to hear the
voice of the abbe answering him in those very words
through the wall when asked his name.

"Wait," said Monte Cristo, "I wish to take one final glance
"The result was that the two men communicated with one around this room."
another; how long they did so, nobody knows. One day the
old man fell ill and died. Now guess what the young one "This is fortunate," said the guide; "I have forgotten the other
key."
did?"
"Go and fetch it."
"Tell me."

"No," he muttered, "the doubt I felt was but the
commencement of forgetfulness; but here the wound
reopens, and the heart again thirsts for vengeance. And the
prisoner," he continued aloud, "was he ever heard of
afterwards?"
"Oh, no; of course not. You can understand that one of two

"No, take it away; I can see in the dark."
"Why, you are like No. 34. They said he was so accustomed
to darkness that he could see a pin in the darkest corner of
his dungeon."
"He spent fourteen years to arrive at that," muttered the
count.
The guide carried away the torch. The count had spoken
correctly. Scarcely had a few seconds elapsed, ere he saw
everything as distinctly as by daylight. Then he looked
around him, and really recognized his dungeon.
"Yes," he said, "there is the stone upon which I used to sit;
there is the impression made by my shoulders on the wall;
there is the mark of my blood made when one day I dashed
my head against the wall. Oh, those figures, how well I
remember them! I made them one day to calculate the age of
my father, that I might know whether I should find him still
living, and that of Mercedes, to know if I should find her still
free. After finishing that calculation, I had a minute's hope. I
did not reckon upon hunger and infidelity!" and a bitter
laugh escaped the count. He saw in fancy the burial of his
father, and the marriage of Mercedes. On the other side of
the dungeon he perceived an inscription, the white letters of
which were still visible on the green wall. "`O God,'" he read,
"`preserve my memory!' Oh, yes," he cried, "that was my
only prayer at last; I no longer begged for liberty, but
memory; I dreaded to become mad and forgetful. O God,
thou hast preserved my memory; I thank thee, I thank thee!"
At this moment the light of the torch was reflected on the
445


CHAPTER 113 THE PAST

wall; the guide was coming; Monte Cristo went to meet him.

"thou who hast given me liberty, knowledge, riches; thou
who, like beings of a superior order to ourselves, couldst
"Follow me, sir;" and without ascending the stairs the guide
understand the science of good and evil; if in the depths of
conducted him by a subterraneous passage to another
the tomb there still remain something within us which can
entrance. There, again, Monte Cristo was assailed by a
respond to the voice of those who are left on earth; if after
multitude of thoughts. The first thing that met his eye was
death the soul ever revisit the places where we have lived
the meridian, drawn by the abbe on the wall, by which he
and suffered, -- then, noble heart, sublime soul, then I
calculated the time; then he saw the remains of the bed on
conjure thee by the paternal love thou didst bear me, by the
which the poor prisoner had died. The sight of this, instead
filial obedience I vowed to thee, grant me some sign, some
of exciting the anguish experienced by the count in the
revelation! Remove from me the remains of doubt, which, if
dungeon, filled his heart with a soft and grateful sentiment,
it change not to conviction, must become remorse!" The
and tears fell from his eyes.
count bowed his head, and clasped his hands together.
"This is where the mad abbe was kept, sir, and that is where
"Here, sir," said a voice behind him.
the young man entered; "and the guide pointed to the
opening, which had remained unclosed. "From the Monte Cristo shuddered, and arose. The concierge held out
appearance of the stone," he continued, "a learned gentleman the strips of cloth upon which the Abbe Faria had spread the
discovered that the prisoners might have communicated riches of his mind. The manuscript was the great work by
together for ten years. Poor things! Those must have been the Abbe Faria upon the kingdoms of Italy. The count seized
ten weary years."
it hastily, his eyes immediately fell upon the epigraph, and
he read, "`Thou shalt tear out the dragons' teeth, and shall
Dantes took some louis from his pocket, and gave them to
trample the lions under foot, saith the Lord.'"
the man who had twice unconsciously pitied him. The guide
took them, thinking them merely a few pieces of little value; "Ah," he exclaimed, "here is my answer. Thanks, father,
but the light of the torch revealed their true worth. "Sir," he thanks." And feeling in his pocket, he took thence a small
said, "you have made a mistake; you have given me gold."
pocket-book, which contained ten bank-notes, each of 1,000
francs.
"I know it." The concierge looked upon the count with
surprise. "Sir," he cried, scarcely able to believe his good "Here," he said, "take this pocket-book."
fortune -- "sir, I cannot understand your generosity!"
"Do you give it to me?"
"Oh, it is very simple, my good fellow; I have been a sailor,
"Yes; but only on condition that you will not open it till I am
and your story touched me more than it would others."
gone;" and placing in his breast the treasure he had just
"Then, sir, since you are so liberal, I ought to offer you found, which was more valuable to him than the richest
something."
jewel, he rushed out of the corridor, and reaching his boat,
cried, "To Marseilles!" Then, as he departed, he fixed his eyes
"What have you to offer to me, my friend? Shells?
upon the gloomy prison. "Woe," he cried, "to those who
Straw-work? Thank you!"
confined me in that wretched prison; and woe to those who
"No, sir, neither of those; something connected with this forgot that I was there!" As he repassed the Catalans, the
story."
count turned around and burying his head in his cloak
murmured the name of a woman. The victory was complete;
"Really? What is it?"
twice he had overcome his doubts. The name he pronounced,
"Listen," said the guide; "I said to myself, `Something is in a voice of tenderness, amounting almost to love, was that
always left in a cell inhabited by one prisoner for fifteen of Haidee.
years,' so I began to sound the wall."
On landing, the count turned towards the cemetery, where
"Ah," cried Monte Cristo, remembering the abbe's two he felt sure of finding Morrel. He, too, ten years ago, had
hiding-places.
piously sought out a tomb, and sought it vainly. He, who
"After some search, I found that the floor gave a hollow returned to France with millions, had been unable to find the
grave of his father, who had perished from hunger. Morrel
sound near the head of the bed, and at the hearth."
had indeed placed a cross over the spot, but it had fallen
"Yes," said the count, "yes."
down and the grave-digger had burnt it, as he did all the old
"I raised the stones, and found" -wood in the churchyard. The worthy merchant had been
more fortunate. Dying in the arms of his children, he had
"A rope-ladder and some tools?"
been by them laid by the side of his wife, who had preceded
"How do you know that?" asked the guide in astonishment.
him in eternity by two years. Two large slabs of marble, on
"I do not know -- I only guess it, because that sort of thing is which were inscribed their names, were placed on either side
of a little enclosure, railed in, and shaded by four
generally found in prisoners' cells."
cypress-trees. Morrel was leaning against one of these,
"Yes, sir, a rope-ladder and tools."
mechanically fixing his eyes on the graves. His grief was so
"And have you them yet?"
profound that he was nearly unconscious. "Maximilian," said
the count, "you should not look on the graves, but there;"
"No, sir; I sold them to visitors, who considered them great
and he pointed upwards.
curiosities; but I have still something left."
"The dead are everywhere," said Morrel; "did you not
"What is it?" asked the count, impatiently.
yourself tell me so as we left Paris?"
"A sort of book, written upon strips of cloth."
"Maximilian," said the count, "you asked me during the
"Go and fetch it, my good fellow; and if it be what I hope, journey to allow you to remain some days at Marseilles. Do
you will do well."
you still wish to do so?"
"I will run for it, sir;" and the guide went out. Then the count
knelt down by the side of the bed, which death had
converted into an altar. "Oh, second father," he exclaimed,
446

"I have no wishes, count; only I fancy I could pass the time
less painfully here than anywhere else."
"So much the better, for I must leave you; but I carry your

word with me, do I not?"
"Ah, count, I shall forget it."

almost doubtful of providence; and when his son sought his
grave ten years afterwards, his tomb had disappeared, and
no one could say, `There sleeps the father you so well
loved.'"

"No, you will not forget it, because you are a man of honor,
Morrel, because you have taken an oath, and are about to do
"Oh!" exclaimed Morrel.
so again."
"He was, then, a more unhappy son than you, Morrel, for he
"Oh, count, have pity upon me. I am so unhappy."
could not even find his father's grave."
"I have known a man much more unfortunate than you,
"But then he had the woman he loved still remaining?"
Morrel."
"You are deceived, Morrel, that woman" -"Impossible!"
"She was dead?"
"Alas," said Monte Cristo, "it is the infirmity of our nature
always to believe ourselves much more unhappy than those "Worse than that, she was faithless, and had married one of
who groan by our sides!"
the persecutors of her betrothed. You see, then, Morrel, that
he was a more unhappy lover than you."
"What can be more wretched than the man who has lost all
he loved and desired in the world?"
"And has he found consolation?"
"Listen, Morrel, and pay attention to what I am about to tell
you. I knew a man who like you had fixed all his hopes of
happiness upon a woman. He was young, he had an old
father whom he loved, a betrothed bride whom he adored.
He was about to marry her, when one of the caprices of fate,
-- which would almost make us doubt the goodness of
providence, if that providence did not afterwards reveal
itself by proving that all is but a means of conducting to an
end, -- one of those caprices deprived him of his mistress, of
the future of which he had dreamed (for in his blindness he
forgot he could only read the present), and cast him into a
dungeon."
"Ah," said Morrel, "one quits a dungeon in a week, a month,
or a year."

"He has at least found peace."
"And does he ever expect to be happy?"
"He hopes so, Maximilian." The young man's head fell on his
breast.
"You have my promise," he said, after a minute's pause,
extending his hand to Monte Cristo. "Only remember" -"On the 5th of October, Morrel, I shall expect you at the
Island of Monte Cristo. On the 4th a yacht will wait for you
in the port of Bastia, it will be called the Eurus. You will give
your name to the captain, who will bring you to me. It is
understood -- is it not?"
"But, count, do you remember that the 5th of October" --

"He remained there fourteen years, Morrel," said the count, "Child," replied the count, "not to know the value of a man's
placing his hand on the young man's shoulder. Maximilian word! I have told you twenty times that if you wish to die on
that day, I will assist you. Morrel, farewell!"
shuddered.
"Fourteen years!" he muttered -- "Fourteen years!" repeated "Do you leave me?"
the count. "During that time he had many moments of "Yes; I have business in Italy. I leave you alone with your
despair. He also, Morrel, like you, considered himself the misfortunes, and with hope, Maximilian."
unhappiest of men."
"When do you leave?"
"Well?" asked Morrel.
"Immediately; the steamer waits, and in an hour I shall be far
"Well, at the height of his despair God assisted him through from you. Will you accompany me to the harbor,
human means. At first, perhaps, he did not recognize the Maximilian?"
infinite mercy of the Lord, but at last he took patience and
"I am entirely yours, count." Morrel accompanied the count
waited. One day he miraculously left the prison,
to the harbor. The white steam was ascending like a plume
transformed, rich, powerful. His first cry was for his father;
of feathers from the black chimney. The steamer soon
but that father was dead."
disappeared, and in an hour afterwards, as the count had
"My father, too, is dead," said Morrel.
said, was scarcely distinguishable in the horizon amidst the
"Yes; but your father died in your arms, happy, respected, fogs of the night.
rich, and full of years; his father died poor, despairing,

447


CHAPTER 114 PEPPINO


Chapter 114 Peppino

A

t the same time that the steamer disappeared behind
Cape Morgion, a man travelling post on the road from
Florence to Rome had just passed the little town of
Aquapendente. He was travelling fast enough to cover a
great deal of ground without exciting suspicion. This man
was dressed in a greatcoat, or rather a surtout, a little worse
for the journey, but which exhibited the ribbon of the Legion
of Honor still fresh and brilliant, a decoration which also
ornamented the under coat. He might be recognized, not
only by these signs, but also from the accent with which he
spoke to the postilion, as a Frenchman. Another proof that
he was a native of the universal country was apparent in the
fact of his knowing no other Italian words than the terms
used in music, and which like the "goddam" of Figaro,
served all possible linguistic requirements. "Allegro!" he
called out to the postilions at every ascent. "Moderato!" he
cried as they descended. And heaven knows there are hills
enough between Rome and Florence by the way of
Aquapendente! These two words greatly amused the men to
whom they were addressed. On reaching La Storta, the point
from whence Rome is first visible, the traveller evinced none
of the enthusiastic curiosity which usually leads strangers to
stand up and endeavor to catch sight of the dome of St.
Peter's, which may be seen long before any other object is
distinguishable. No, he merely drew a pocketbook from his
pocket, and took from it a paper folded in four, and after
having examined it in a manner almost reverential, he said -"Good! I have it still!"

With the Frenchman, the man who had followed him
entered too; the Frenchman knocked at the inner door, and
entered the first room; his shadow did the same.
"Messrs. Thomson & French?" inquired the stranger.
An attendant arose at a sign from a confidential clerk at the
first desk. "Whom shall I announce?" said the attendant.
"Baron Danglars."
"Follow me," said the man. A door opened, through which
the attendant and the baron disappeared. The man who had
followed Danglars sat down on a bench. The clerk continued
to write for the next five minutes; the man preserved
profound silence, and remained perfectly motionless. Then
the pen of the clerk ceased to move over the paper; he raised
his head, and appearing to be perfectly sure of privacy, -"Ah, ha," he said, "here you are, Peppino!"
"Yes," was the laconic reply. "You have found out that there
is something worth having about this large gentleman?"
"There is no great merit due to me, for we were informed of
it."
"You know his business here, then."
"Pardieu, he has come to draw, but I don't know how much!"
"You will know presently, my friend."
"Very well, only do not give me false information as you did
the other day."

The carriage entered by the Porto del Popolo, turned to the
left, and stopped at the Hotel d'Espagne. Old Pastrini, our
former acquaintance, received the traveller at the door, hat in
hand. The traveller alighted, ordered a good dinner, and
inquired the address of the house of Thomson & French,
which was immediately given to him, as it was one of the
most celebrated in Rome. It was situated in the Via dei
Banchi, near St. Peter's. In Rome, as everywhere else, the
arrival of a post-chaise is an event. Ten young descendants
of Marius and the Gracchi, barefooted and out at elbows,
with one hand resting on the hip and the other gracefully
curved above the head, stared at the traveller, the post-chaise,
and the horses; to these were added about fifty little
vagabonds from the Papal States, who earned a pittance by
diving into the Tiber at high water from the bridge of St.
Angelo. Now, as these street Arabs of Rome, more fortunate
than those of Paris, understand every language, more
especially the French, they heard the traveller order an
apartment, a dinner, and finally inquire the way to the house
of Thomson & French. The result was that when the
new-comer left the hotel with the cicerone, a man detached
himself from the rest of the idlers, and without having been
seen by the traveller, and appearing to excite no attention
from the guide, followed the stranger with as much skill as a
Parisian police agent would have used.

"What do you mean? -- of whom do you speak? Was it the
Englishman who carried off 3,000 crowns from here the
other day?"

The Frenchman had been so impatient to reach the house of
Thomson & French that he would not wait for the horses to
be harnessed, but left word for the carriage to overtake him
on the road, or to wait for him at the bankers' door. He
reached it before the carriage arrived. The Frenchman
entered, leaving in the anteroom his guide, who immediately
entered into conversation with two or three of the
industrious idlers who are always to be found in Rome at the
doors of banking-houses, churches, museums, or theatres.

"I told you we were informed beforehand."

448

"No; he really had 3,000 crowns, and we found them. I mean
the Russian prince, who you said had 30,000 livres, and we
only found 22,000."
"You must have searched badly."
"Luigi Vampa himself searched."
"Indeed? But you must let me make my observations, or the
Frenchman will transact his business without my knowing
the sum." Peppino nodded, and taking a rosary from his
pocket began to mutter a few prayers while the clerk
disappeared through the same door by which Danglars and
the attendant had gone out. At the expiration of ten minutes
the clerk returned with a beaming countenance. "Well?"
asked Peppino of his friend.
"Joy, joy -- the sum is large!"
"Five or six millions, is it not?"
"Yes, you know the amount."
"On the receipt of the Count of Monte Cristo?"
"Why, how came you to be so well acquainted with all this?"
"Then why do you apply to me?"
"That I may be sure I have the right man."
"Yes, it is indeed he. Five millions -- a pretty sum, eh,
Peppino?"
"Hush -- here is our man!" The clerk seized his pen, and
Peppino his beads; one was writing and the other praying

when the door opened. Danglars looked radiant with joy; the distance of seven leagues. What subject of meditation could
banker accompanied him to the door. Peppino followed present itself to the banker, so fortunately become bankrupt?
Danglars.
Danglars thought for ten minutes about his wife in Paris;
According to the arrangements, the carriage was waiting at another ten minutes about his daughter travelling with
the door. The guide held the door open. Guides are useful Mademoiselle d'Armilly; the same period was given to his
people, who will turn their hands to anything. Danglars creditors, and the manner in which he intended spending
leaped into the carriage like a young man of twenty. The their money; and then, having no subject left for
cicerone reclosed the door, and sprang up by the side of the contemplation, he shut his eyes, and fell asleep. Now and
coachman. Peppino mounted the seat behind.
then a jolt more violent than the rest caused him to open his
eyes; then he felt that he was still being carried with great
"Will your excellency visit St. Peter's?" asked the cicerone.
rapidity over the same country, thickly strewn with broken
"I did not come to Rome to see," said Danglars aloud; then he aqueducts, which looked like granite giants petrified while
added softly, with an avaricious smile, "I came to touch!" running a race. But the night was cold, dull, and rainy, and it
and he rapped his pocket-book, in which he had just placed was much more pleasant for a traveller to remain in the
a letter.
warm carriage than to put his head out of the window to
make inquiries of a postilion whose only answer was "Non
"Then your excellency is going" -capisco."
"To the hotel."
Danglars therefore continued to sleep, saying to himself that
"Casa Pastrini!" said the cicerone to the coachman, and the he would be sure to awake at the posting-house. The
carriage drove rapidly on. Ten minutes afterwards the baron carriage stopped. Danglars fancied that they had reached the
entered his apartment, and Peppino stationed himself on the long-desired point; he opened his eyes and looked through
bench outside the door of the hotel, after having whispered the window, expecting to find himself in the midst of some
something in the ear of one of the descendants of Marius and town, or at least village; but he saw nothing except what
the Gracchi whom we noticed at the beginning of the chapter, seemed like a ruin, where three or four men went and came
who immediately ran down the road leading to the Capitol like shadows. Danglars waited a moment, expecting the
at his fullest speed. Danglars was tired and sleepy; he postilion to come and demand payment with the termination
therefore went to bed, placing his pocketbook under his of his stage. He intended taking advantage of the
pillow. Peppino had a little spare time, so he had a game of opportunity to make fresh inquiries of the new conductor;
mora with the facchini, lost three crowns, and then to but the horses were unharnessed, and others put in their
console himself drank a bottle of Orvieto.
places, without any one claiming money from the traveller.
The next morning Danglars awoke late, though he went to Danglars, astonished, opened the door; but a strong hand
bed so early; he had not slept well for five or six nights, even pushed him back, and the carriage rolled on. The baron was
if he had slept at all. He breakfasted heartily, and caring little, completely roused. "Eh?" he said to the postilion, "eh, mio
as he said, for the beauties of the Eternal City, ordered caro?"
post-horses at noon. But Danglars had not reckoned upon This was another little piece of Italian the baron had learned
the formalities of the police and the idleness of the from hearing his daughter sing Italian duets with Cavalcanti.
posting-master. The horses only arrived at two o'clock, and But mio caro did not reply. Danglars then opened the
the cicerone did not bring the passport till three. All these window.
preparations had collected a number of idlers round the
door of Signor Pastrini's; the descendants of Marius and the "Come, my friend," he said, thrusting his hand through the
Gracchi were also not wanting. The baron walked opening, "where are we going?"
triumphantly through the crowd, who for the sake of gain
styled him "your excellency." As Danglars had hitherto
contented himself with being called a baron, he felt rather
flattered at the title of excellency, and distributed a dozen
silver coins among the beggars, who were ready, for twelve
more, to call him "your highness."

"Dentro la testa!" answered a solemn and imperious voice,
accompanied by a menacing gesture. Danglars thought
dentro la testa meant, "Put in your head!" He was making
rapid progress in Italian. He obeyed, not without some
uneasiness, which, momentarily increasing, caused his mind,
instead of being as unoccupied as it was when he began his
"Which road?" asked the postilion in Italian. "The Ancona journey, to fill with ideas which were very likely to keep a
road," replied the baron. Signor Pastrini interpreted the traveller awake, more especially one in such a situation as
question and answer, and the horses galloped off. Danglars Danglars. His eyes acquired that quality which in the first
intended travelling to Venice, where he would receive one moment of strong emotion enables them to see distinctly,
part of his fortune, and then proceeding to Vienna, where he and which afterwards fails from being too much taxed.
would find the rest, he meant to take up his residence in the Before we are alarmed, we see correctly; when we are
alarmed, we see double; and when we have been alarmed,
latter town, which he had been told was a city of pleasure.
we see nothing but trouble. Danglars observed a man in a
He had scarcely advanced three leagues out of Rome when cloak galloping at the right hand of the carriage.
daylight began to disappear. Danglars had not intended
starting so late, or he would have remained; he put his head "Some gendarme!" he exclaimed. "Can I have been
out and asked the postilion how long it would be before they intercepted by French telegrams to the pontifical
reached the next town. "Non capisco" (do not understand), authorities?" He resolved to end his anxiety. "Where are you
was the reply. Danglars bent his head, which he meant to taking me?" he asked. "Dentro la testa," replied the same
imply, "Very well." The carriage again moved on. "I will stop voice, with the same menacing accent.
at the first posting-house," said Danglars to himself.
He still felt the same self-satisfaction which he had
experienced the previous evening, and which had procured
him so good a night's rest. He was luxuriously stretched in a
good English calash, with double springs; he was drawn by
four good horses, at full gallop; he knew the relay to be at a

Danglars turned to the left; another man on horseback was
galloping on that side. "Decidedly," said Danglars, with the
perspiration on his forehead, "I must be under arrest." And
he threw himself back in the calash, not this time to sleep,
but to think. Directly afterwards the moon rose. He then saw
449


CHAPTER 114 PEPPINO

the great aqueducts, those stone phantoms which he had
before remarked, only then they were on the right hand,
now they were on the left. He understood that they had
described a circle, and were bringing him back to Rome. "Oh,
unfortunate!" he cried, "they must have obtained my arrest."
The carriage continued to roll on with frightful speed. An
hour of terror elapsed, for every spot they passed showed
that they were on the road back. At length he saw a dark
mass, against which it seemed as if the carriage was about to
dash; but the vehicle turned to one side, leaving the barrier
behind and Danglars saw that it was one of the ramparts
encircling Rome.

rearguard, and pushing Danglars whenever he happened to
stop, they came by a gentle declivity to the intersection of
two corridors. The walls were hollowed out in sepulchres,
one above the other, and which seemed in contrast with the
white stones to open their large dark eyes, like those which
we see on the faces of the dead. A sentinel struck the rings of
his carbine against his left hand. "Who comes there?" he
cried.
"A friend, a friend!" said Peppino; "but where is the captain?"

"There," said the sentinel, pointing over his shoulder to a
spacious crypt, hollowed out of the rock, the lights from
which shone into the passage through the large arched
"Mon dieu!" cried Danglars, "we are not returning to Rome;
openings. "Fine spoil, captain, fine spoil!" said Peppino in
then it is not justice which is pursuing me! Gracious heavens;
Italian, and taking Danglars by the collar of his coat he
another idea presents itself -- what if they should be" -dragged him to an opening resembling a door, through
His hair stood on end. He remembered those interesting which they entered the apartment which the captain
stories, so little believed in Paris, respecting Roman bandits; appeared to have made his dwelling-place.
he remembered the adventures that Albert de Morcerf had
"Is this the man?" asked the captain, who was attentively
related when it was intended that he should marry
reading Plutarch's "Life of Alexander."
Mademoiselle Eugenie. "They are robbers, perhaps," he
muttered. Just then the carriage rolled on something harder "Himself, captain -- himself."
than gravel road. Danglars hazarded a look on both sides of "Very well, show him to me." At this rather impertinent
the road, and perceived monuments of a singular form, and order, Peppino raised his torch to the face of Danglars, who
his mind now recalled all the details Morcerf had related, hastily withdrew that he might not have his eyelashes burnt.
and comparing them with his own situation, he felt sure that His agitated features presented the appearance of pale and
he must be on the Appian Way. On the left, in a sort of hideous terror. "The man is tired," said the captain, "conduct
valley, he perceived a circular excavation. It was Caracalla's him to his bed."
circus. On a word from the man who rode at the side of the
carriage, it stopped. At the same time the door was opened. "Oh," murmured Danglars," that bed is probably one of the
"Scendi!" exclaimed a commanding voice. Danglars instantly coffins hollowed in the wall, and the sleep I shall enjoy will
descended; although he did not yet speak Italian, he be death from one of the poniards I see glistening in the
understood it very well. More dead than alive, he looked darkness."
around him. Four men surrounded him, besides the From their beds of dried leaves or wolf-skins at the back of
postilion.
the chamber now arose the companions of the man who had
"Di qua," said one of the men, descending a little path been found by Albert de Morcerf reading "Caesar's
leading out of the Appian Way. Danglars followed his guide Commentaries," and by Danglars studying the "Life of
without opposition, and had no occasion to turn around to Alexander." The banker uttered a groan and followed his
see whether the three others were following him. Still it guide; he neither supplicated nor exclaimed. He no longer
appeared as though they were stationed at equal distances possessed strength, will, power, or feeling; he followed
from one another, like sentinels. After walking for about ten where they led him. At length he found himself at the foot of
minutes, during which Danglars did not exchange a single a staircase, and he mechanically lifted his foot five or six
word with his guide, he found himself between a hillock and times. Then a low door was opened before him, and bending
a clump of high weeds; three men, standing silent, formed a his head to avoid striking his forehead he entered a small
triangle, of which he was the centre. He wished to speak, but room cut out of the rock. The cell was clean, though empty,
his tongue refused to move. "Avanti!" said the same sharp and dry, though situated at an immeasurable distance under
the earth. A bed of dried grass covered with goat-skins was
and imperative voice.
placed in one corner. Danglars brightened up on beholding
This time Danglars had double reason to understand, for if it, fancying that it gave some promise of safety. "Oh, God be
the word and gesture had not explained the speaker's praised," he said; "it is a real bed!"
meaning, it was clearly expressed by the man walking
behind him, who pushed him so rudely that he struck "Ecco!" said the guide, and pushing Danglars into the cell, he
against the guide. This guide was our friend Peppino, who closed the door upon him. A bolt grated and Danglars was a
dashed into the thicket of high weeds, through a path which prisoner. If there had been no bolt, it would have been
none but lizards or polecats could have imagined to be an impossible for him to pass through the midst of the garrison
open road. Peppino stopped before a pit overhung by thick who held the catacombs of St. Sebastian, encamped round a
hedges; the pit, half open, afforded a passage to the young master whom our readers must have recognized as the
man, who disappeared like the evil spirits in the fairy tales. famous Luigi Vampa. Danglars, too, had recognized the
The voice and gesture of the man who followed Danglars bandit, whose existence he would not believe when Albert
ordered him to do the same. There was no longer any doubt, de Morcerf mentioned him in Paris; and not only did he
the bankrupt was in the hands of Roman banditti. Danglars recognize him, but the cell in which Albert had been
acquitted himself like a man placed between two dangerous confined, and which was probably kept for the
positions, and who is rendered brave by fear. accommodation of strangers. These recollections were dwelt
Notwithstanding his large stomach, certainly not intended to upon with some pleasure by Danglars, and restored him to
penetrate the fissures of the Campagna, he slid down like some degree of tranquillity. Since the bandits had not
Peppino, and closing his eyes fell upon his feet. As he despatched him at once, he felt that they would not kill him
touched the ground, he opened his eyes. The path was wide, at all. They had arrested him for the purpose of robbery, and
but dark. Peppino, who cared little for being recognized now as he had only a few louis about him, he doubted not he
that he was in his own territories, struck a light and lit a would be ransomed. He remembered that Morcerf had been
torch. Two other men descended after Danglars forming the taxed at 4,000 crowns, and as he considered himself of much
450

greater importance than Morcerf he fixed his own price at
8,000 crowns. Eight thousand crowns amounted to 48,000
livres; he would then have about 5,050,000 francs left. With
this sum he could manage to keep out of difficulties.
Therefore, tolerably secure in being able to extricate himself

from his position, provided he were not rated at the
unreasonable sum of 5,050,000 francs, he stretched himself
on his bed, and after turning over two or three times, fell
asleep with the tranquillity of the hero whose life Luigi
Vampa was studying.

451


CHAPTER 115 LUIGI VAMPA'S BILL OF FARE


Chapter 115 Luigi Vampa's Bill Of Fare

W

e awake from every sleep except the one dreaded by
Danglars. He awoke. To a Parisian accustomed to
silken curtains, walls hung with velvet drapery, and the soft
perfume of burning wood, the white smoke of which
diffuses itself in graceful curves around the room, the
appearance of the whitewashed cell which greeted his eyes
on awakening seemed like the continuation of some
disagreeable dream. But in such a situation a single moment
suffices to change the strongest doubt into certainty. "Yes,
yes," he murmured, "I am in the hands of the brigands of
whom Albert de Morcerf spoke." His first idea was to
breathe, that he might know whether he was wounded. He
borrowed this from "Don Quixote," the only book he had
ever read, but which he still slightly remembered.

felt his own not to be very well supplied just then, and
gradually the man appeared less ugly, the bread less black,
and the cheese more fresh, while those dreadful vulgar
onions recalled to his mind certain sauces and side-dishes,
which his cook prepared in a very superior manner
whenever he said, "Monsieur Deniseau, let me have a nice
little fricassee to-day." He got up and knocked on the door;
the bandit raised his head. Danglars knew that he was heard,
so he redoubled his blows. "Che cosa?" asked the bandit.
"Come, come," said Danglars, tapping his fingers against the
door, "I think it is quite time to think of giving me something
to eat!" But whether he did not understand him, or whether
he had received no orders respecting the nourishment of
Danglars, the giant, without answering, went on with his
dinner. Danglars' feelings were hurt, and not wishing to put
himself under obligations to the brute, the banker threw
"No," he cried, "they have not wounded, but perhaps they himself down again on his goat-skin and did not breathe
have robbed me!" and he thrust his hands into his pockets. another word.
They were untouched; the hundred louis he had reserved for
Four hours passed by and the giant was replaced by another
his journey from Rome to Venice were in his trousers pocket,
bandit. Danglars, who really began to experience sundry
and in that of his great-coat he found the little note-case
gnawings at the stomach, arose softly, again applied his eye
containing his letter of credit for 5,050,000 francs. "Singular
to the crack of the door, and recognized the intelligent
bandits!" he exclaimed; "they have left me my purse and
countenance of his guide. It was, indeed, Peppino who was
pocket-book. As I was saying last night, they intend me to be
preparing to mount guard as comfortably as possible by
ransomed. Hallo, here is my watch! Let me see what time it
seating himself opposite to the door, and placing between
is." Danglars' watch, one of Breguet's repeaters, which he
his legs an earthen pan, containing chick-pease stewed with
had carefully wound up on the previous night, struck half
bacon. Near the pan he also placed a pretty little basket of
past five. Without this, Danglars would have been quite
Villetri grapes and a flask of Orvieto. Peppino was decidedly
ignorant of the time, for daylight did not reach his cell.
an epicure. Danglars watched these preparations and his
Should he demand an explanation from the bandits, or
mouth watered. "Come," he said to himself, "let me try if he
should he wait patiently for them to propose it? The last
will be more tractable than the other;" and he tapped gently
alternative seemed the most prudent, so he waited until
at the door. "On y va," (coming) exclaimed Peppino, who
twelve o'clock. During all this time a sentinel, who had been
from frequenting the house of Signor Pastrini understood
relieved at eight o'clock, had been watching his door.
French perfectly in all its idioms.
Danglars suddenly felt a strong inclination to see the person
who kept watch over him. He had noticed that a few rays, Danglars immediately recognized him as the man who had
not of daylight, but from a lamp, penetrated through the called out in such a furious manner, "Put in your head!" But
ill-joined planks of the door; he approached just as the this was not the time for recrimination, so he assumed his
brigand was refreshing himself with a mouthful of brandy, most agreeable manner and said with a gracious smile, -which, owing to the leathern bottle containing it, sent forth "Excuse me, sir, but are they not going to give me any
an odor which was extremely unpleasant to Danglars. dinner?"
"Faugh!" he exclaimed, retreating to the farther corner of his
"Does your excellency happen to be hungry?"
cell.
"Happen to be hungry, -- that's pretty good, when I haven't
At twelve this man was replaced by another functionary,
eaten for twenty-four hours!" muttered Danglars. Then he
and Danglars, wishing to catch sight of his new guardian,
added aloud, "Yes, sir, I am hungry -- very hungry."
approached the door again. He was an athletic, gigantic
bandit, with large eyes, thick lips, and a flat nose; his red "What would your excellency like?" and Peppino placed his
hair fell in dishevelled masses like snakes around his pan on the ground, so that the steam rose directly under the
shoulders. "Ah, ha," cried Danglars, "this fellow is more like nostrils of Danglars. "Give your orders."
an ogre than anything else; however, I am rather too old and "Have you kitchens here?"
tough to be very good eating!" We see that Danglars was
collected enough to jest; at the same time, as though to "Kitchens? -- of course -- complete ones."
disprove the ogreish propensities, the man took some black "And cooks?"
bread, cheese, and onions from his wallet, which he began
"Excellent!"
devouring voraciously. "May I be hanged," said Danglars,
glancing at the bandit's dinner through the crevices of the "Well, a fowl, fish, game, -- it signifies little, so that I eat."
door, -- "may I be hanged if I can understand how people "As your excellency pleases. You mentioned a fowl, I think?"
can eat such filth!" and he withdrew to seat himself upon his
"Yes, a fowl." Peppino, turning around, shouted, "A fowl for
goat-skin, which reminded him of the smell of the brandy.
his excellency!" His voice yet echoed in the archway when a
But the mysteries of nature are incomprehensible, and there handsome, graceful, and half-naked young man appeared,
are certain invitations contained in even the coarsest food bearing a fowl in a silver dish on his head, without the
which appeal very irresistibly to a fasting stomach. Danglars assistance of his hands. "I could almost believe myself at the
452

Cafe de Paris," murmured Danglars.
"Here, your excellency," said Peppino, taking the fowl from
the young bandit and placing it on the worm-eaten table,
which with the stool and the goat-skin bed formed the entire
furniture of the cell. Danglars asked for a knife and fork.
"Here, excellency," said Peppino, offering him a little blunt
knife and a boxwood fork. Danglars took the knife in one
hand and the fork in the other, and was about to cut up the
fowl. "Pardon me, excellency," said Peppino, placing his
hand on the banker's shoulder; "people pay here before they
eat. They might not be satisfied, and" --

"Then open the door directly." Peppino obeyed. "Now look
here, I want something to eat! To eat -- do you hear?"
"Are you hungry?"
"Come, you understand me."
"What would your excellency like to eat?"
"A piece of dry bread, since the fowls are beyond all price in
this accursed place."
"Bread? Very well. Hallo, there, some bread!" he called. The
youth brought a small loaf. "How much?" asked Danglars.

"Ah, ha," thought Danglars, "this is not so much like Paris,
except that I shall probably be skinned! Never mind, I'll fix
that all right. I have always heard how cheap poultry is in
Italy; I should think a fowl is worth about twelve sous at
Rome. -- There," he said, throwing a louis down. Peppino
picked up the louis, and Danglars again prepared to carve
the fowl. "Stay a moment, your excellency," said Peppino,
rising; "you still owe me something."

"Four thousand nine hundred and ninety-eight louis," said
Peppino; "You have paid two louis in advance."

"Your excellency has given me a louis on account."

that you intend starving me to death."

"A louis on account for a fowl?"

"Oh, dear, no, your excellency, unless you intend to commit
suicide. Pay and eat."

"What? One hundred thousand francs for a loaf?"
"One hundred thousand francs," repeated Peppino.
"But you only asked 100,000 francs for a fowl!"

"We have a fixed price for all our provisions. It signifies
nothing whether you eat much or little -- whether you have
"I said they would skin me," thought Danglars; but resolving ten dishes or one -- it is always the same price."
to resist the extortion, he said, "Come, how much do I owe "What, still keeping up this silly jest? My dear fellow, it is
you for this fowl?"
perfectly ridiculous -- stupid! You had better tell me at once

"Certainly; and your excellency now owes me 4,999 louis."
Danglars opened his enormous eyes on hearing this gigantic
joke. "Come, come, this is very droll -- very amusing -- I
allow; but, as I am very hungry, pray allow me to eat. Stay,
here is another louis for you."

"And what am I to pay with, brute?" said Danglars, enraged.
"Do you suppose I carry 100,000 francs in my pocket?"

"Your excellency has 5,050,000 francs in your pocket; that
will be fifty fowls at 100,000 francs apiece, and half a fowl for
"Then that will make only 4,998 louis more," said Peppino the 50,000."
with the same indifference. "I shall get them all in time."
Danglars shuddered. The bandage fell from his eyes, and he
"Oh, as for that," said Danglars, angry at this prolongation of
the jest, -- "as for that you won't get them at all. Go to the
devil! You do not know with whom you have to deal!"
Peppino made a sign, and the youth hastily removed the
fowl. Danglars threw himself upon his goat-skin, and
Peppino, reclosing the door, again began eating his pease
and bacon. Though Danglars could not see Peppino, the
noise of his teeth allowed no doubt as to his occupation. He
was certainly eating, and noisily too, like an ill-bred man.
"Brute!" said Danglars. Peppino pretended not to hear him,
and without even turning his head continued to eat slowly.
Danglars' stomach felt so empty, that it seemed as if it would
be impossible ever to fill it again; still he had patience for
another half-hour, which appeared to him like a century. He
again arose and went to the door. "Come, sir, do not keep me
starving here any longer, but tell me what they want."
"Nay, your excellency, it is you who should tell us what you
want. Give your orders, and we will execute them."

understood the joke, which he did not think quite so stupid
as he had done just before. "Come," he said, "if I pay you the
100,000 francs, will you be satisfied, and allow me to eat at
my ease?"
"Certainly," said Peppino.
"But how can I pay them?"
"Oh, nothing easier; you have an account open with Messrs.
Thomson & French, Via dei Banchi, Rome; give me a draft
for 4,998 louis on these gentlemen, and our banker shall take
it." Danglars thought it as well to comply with a good grace,
so he took the pen, ink, and paper Peppino offered him,
wrote the draft, and signed it. "Here," he said, "here is a draft
at sight."
"And here is your fowl." Danglars sighed while he carved
the fowl; it appeared very thin for the price it had cost. As
for Peppino, he examined the paper attentively, put it into
his pocket, and continued eating his pease.

453


CHAPTER 116 THE PARDON


Chapter 116 The Pardon

T

he next day Danglars was again hungry; certainly the air
of that dungeon was very provocative of appetite. The
prisoner expected that he would be at no expense that day,
for like an economical man he had concealed half of his fowl
and a piece of the bread in the corner of his cell. But he had
no sooner eaten than he felt thirsty; he had forgotten that. He
struggled against his thirst till his tongue clave to the roof of
his mouth; then, no longer able to resist, he called out. The
sentinel opened the door; it was a new face. He thought it
would be better to transact business with his old
acquaintance, so he sent for Peppino. "Here I am, your
excellency," said Peppino, with an eagerness which Danglars
thought favorable to him. "What do you want?"
"Something to drink."
"Your excellency knows that wine is beyond all price near
Rome."
"Then give me water," cried Danglars, endeavoring to parry
the blow.
"Oh, water is even more scarce than wine, your excellency, -there has been such a drought."

"We are forbidden to shed your blood."
"And by whom are you forbidden?"
"By him we obey."
"You do, then, obey some one?"
"Yes, a chief."
"I thought you said you were the chief?"
"So I am of these men; but there is another over me."
"And did your superior order you to treat me in this way?"
"Yes."
"But my purse will be exhausted."
"Probably."
"Come," said Danglars, "will you take a million?"
"No."
"Two millions? -- three? -- four? Come, four? I will give them
to you on condition that you let me go."
"Why do you offer me 4,000,000 for what is worth 5,000,000?
This is a kind of usury, banker, that I do not understand."

"Come," thought Danglars, "it is the same old story." And
while he smiled as he attempted to regard the affair as a joke, "Take all, then -- take all, I tell you, and kill me!"
he felt his temples get moist with perspiration.
"Come, come, calm yourself. You will excite your blood, and
"Come, my friend," said Danglars, seeing that he made no that would produce an appetite it would require a million a
impression on Peppino, "you will not refuse me a glass of day to satisfy. Be more economical."
wine?"
"But when I have no more money left to pay you?" asked the
"I have already told you that we do not sell at retail."
infuriated Danglars.
"Well, then, let me have a bottle of the least expensive."

"Then you must suffer hunger."

"They are all the same price."

"Suffer hunger?" said Danglars, becoming pale.

"And what is that?"

"Most likely," replied Vampa coolly.

"Twenty-five thousand francs a bottle."

"But you say you do not wish to kill me?"

"Tell me," cried Danglars, in a tone whose bitterness
Harpagon* alone has been capable of revealing -- "tell the
that you wish to despoil me of all; it will be sooner over than
devouring me piecemeal."

"No."

* The miser in Moliere's comedy of "L'Avare." -- Ed.

"Well, then, wretches," cried Danglars, "I will defy your
infamous calculations -- I would rather die at once! You may
torture, torment, kill me, but you shall not have my
signature again!"

"It is possible such may be the master's intention."
"The master? -- who is he?"

"And yet you will let me perish with hunger?"
"Ah, that is a different thing."

"The person to whom you were conducted yesterday."

"As your excellency pleases," said Vampa, as he left the cell.
Danglars, raving, threw himself on the goat-skin. Who could
"Where is he?"
these men be? Who was the invisible chief? What could be
"Here."
his intentions towards him? And why, when every one else
was allowed to be ransomed, might he not also be? Oh, yes;
"Let me see him."
certainly a speedy, violent death would be a fine means of
"Certainly." And the next moment Luigi Vampa appeared
deceiving these remorseless enemies, who appeared to
before Danglars.
pursue him with such incomprehensible vengeance. But to
"You sent for me?" he said to the prisoner.
die? For the first time in his life, Danglars contemplated
death with a mixture of dread and desire; the time had come
"Are you, sir, the chief of the people who brought me here?"
when the implacable spectre, which exists in the mind of
"Yes, your excellency. What then?"
every human creature, arrested his attention and called out
with every pulsation of his heart, "Thou shalt die!"
"How much do you require for my ransom?"
"Merely the 5,000,000 you have about you." Danglars felt a
dreadful spasm dart through his heart. "But this is all I have
left in the world," he said, "out of an immense fortune. If you
deprive me of that, take away my life also."
454

Danglars resembled a timid animal excited in the chase; first
it flies, then despairs, and at last, by the very force of
desperation, sometimes succeeds in eluding its pursuers.
Danglars meditated an escape; but the walls were solid rock,
a man was sitting reading at the only outlet to the cell, and

behind that man shapes armed with guns continually passed.
His resolution not to sign lasted two days, after which he
offered a million for some food. They sent him a magnificent
supper, and took his million.
From this time the prisoner resolved to suffer no longer, but
to have everything he wanted. At the end of twelve days,
after having made a splendid dinner, he reckoned his
accounts, and found that he had only 50,000 francs left. Then
a strange reaction took place; he who had just abandoned
5,000,000 endeavored to save the 50,000 francs he had left,
and sooner than give them up he resolved to enter again
upon a life of privation -- he was deluded by the hopefulness
that is a premonition of madness. He who for so long a time
had forgotten God, began to think that miracles were
possible -- that the accursed cavern might be discovered by
the officers of the Papal States, who would release him; that
then he would have 50,000 remaining, which would be
sufficient to save him from starvation; and finally he prayed
that this sum might be preserved to him, and as he prayed
he wept. Three days passed thus, during which his prayers
were frequent, if not heartfelt. Sometimes he was delirious,
and fancied he saw an old man stretched on a pallet; he, also,
was dying of hunger.
On the fourth, he was no longer a man, but a living corpse.
He had picked up every crumb that had been left from his
former meals, and was beginning to eat the matting which
covered the floor of his cell. Then he entreated Peppino, as
he would a guardian angel, to give him food; he offered him
1,000 francs for a mouthful of bread. But Peppino did not
answer. On the fifth day he dragged himself to the door of
the cell.
"Are you not a Christian?" he said, falling on his knees. "Do
you wish to assassinate a man who, in the eyes of heaven, is
a brother? Oh, my former friends, my former friends!" he
murmured, and fell with his face to the ground. Then rising
in despair, he exclaimed, "The chief, the chief!"
"Here I am," said Vampa, instantly appearing; "what do you
want?"
"Take my last gold," muttered Danglars, holding out his
pocket-book, "and let me live here; I ask no more for liberty
-- I only ask to live!"
"Then you suffer a great deal?"
"Oh, yes, yes, cruelly!"
"Still, there have been men who suffered more than you."
"I do not think so."

Danglars thought of the old man whom, in his hours of
delirium, he had seen groaning on his bed. He struck his
forehead on the ground and groaned. "Yes," he said, "there
have been some who have suffered more than I have, but
then they must have been martyrs at least."
"Do you repent?" asked a deep, solemn voice, which caused
Danglars' hair to stand on end. His feeble eyes endeavored
to distinguish objects, and behind the bandit he saw a man
enveloped in a cloak, half lost in the shadow of a stone
column.
"Of what must I repent?" stammered Danglars.
"Of the evil you have done," said the voice.
"Oh, yes; oh, yes, I do indeed repent." And he struck his
breast with his emaciated fist.
"Then I forgive you," said the man, dropping his cloak, and
advancing to the light.
"The Count of Monte Cristo!" said Danglars, more pale from
terror than he had been just before from hunger and misery.
"You are mistaken -- I am not the Count of Monte Cristo."
"Then who are you?"
"I am he whom you sold and dishonored -- I am he whose
betrothed you prostituted -- I am he upon whom you
trampled that you might raise yourself to fortune -- I am he
whose father you condemned to die of hunger -- I am he
whom you also condemned to starvation, and who yet
forgives you, because he hopes to be forgiven -- I am
Edmond Dantes!" Danglars uttered a cry, and fell prostrate.
"Rise," said the count, "your life is safe; the same good
fortune has not happened to your accomplices -- one is mad,
the other dead. Keep the 50,000 francs you have left -- I give
them to you. The 5,000,000 you stole from the hospitals has
been restored to them by an unknown hand. And now eat
and drink; I will entertain you to-night. Vampa, when this
man is satisfied, let him be free." Danglars remained
prostrate while the count withdrew; when he raised his head
he saw disappearing down the passage nothing but a
shadow, before which the bandits bowed. According to the
count's directions, Danglars was waited on by Vampa, who
brought him the best wine and fruits of Italy; then, having
conducted him to the road, and pointed to the post-chaise,
left him leaning against a tree. He remained there all night,
not knowing where he was. When daylight dawned he saw
that he was near a stream; he was thirsty, and dragged
himself towards it. As he stooped down to drink, he saw that
his hair had become entirely white.

"Yes; those who have died of hunger."

455


CHAPTER 117 THE FIFTH OF OCTOBER


Chapter 117 The Fifth Of October

I

t was about six o'clock in the evening; an opal-colored
light, through which an autumnal sun shed its golden rays,
descended on the blue ocean. The heat of the day had
gradually decreased, and a light breeze arose, seeming like
the respiration of nature on awakening from the burning
siesta of the south. A delicious zephyr played along the
coasts of the Mediterranean, and wafted from shore to shore
the sweet perfume of plants, mingled with the fresh smell of
the sea.

shoulders of two of our men, they will carry you ashore?"
The young man answered this invitation with a gesture of
indifference, and stepped out of the boat; the sea
immediately rose to his waist. "Ah, your excellency,"
murmured the pilot, "you should not have done so; our
master will scold us for it." The young man continued to
advance, following the sailors, who chose a firm footing.
Thirty strides brought them to dry land; the young man
stamped on the ground to shake off the wet, and looked
around for some one to show him his road, for it was quite
A light yacht, chaste and elegant in its form, was gliding
dark. Just as he turned, a hand rested on his shoulder, and a
amidst the first dews of night over the immense lake,
voice which made him shudder exclaimed, -- "Good-evening,
extending from Gibraltar to the Dardanelles, and from Tunis
Maximilian; you are punctual, thank you!"
to Venice. The vessel resembled a swan with its wings
opened towards the wind, gliding on the water. It advanced "Ah, is it you, count?" said the young man, in an almost
swiftly and gracefully, leaving behind it a glittering stretch joyful accent, pressing Monte Cristo's hand with both his
of foam. By degrees the sun disappeared behind the western own.
horizon; but as though to prove the truth of the fanciful
"Yes; you see I am as exact as you are. But you are dripping,
ideas in heathen mythology, its indiscreet rays reappeared
my dear fellow; you must change your clothes, as Calypso
on the summit of every wave, as if the god of fire had just
said to Telemachus. Come, I have a habitation prepared for
sunk upon the bosom of Amphitrite, who in vain
you in which you will soon forget fatigue and cold." Monte
endeavored to hide her lover beneath her azure mantle. The
Cristo perceived that the young man had turned around;
yacht moved rapidly on, though there did not appear to be
indeed, Morrel saw with surprise that the men who had
sufficient wind to ruffle the curls on the head of a young girl.
brought him had left without being paid, or uttering a word.
Standing on the prow was a tall man, of a dark complexion,
Already the sound of their oars might be heard as they
who saw with dilating eyes that they were approaching a
returned to the yacht.
dark mass of land in the shape of a cone, which rose from the
midst of the waves like the hat of a Catalan. "Is that Monte "Oh, yes," said the count, "you are looking for the sailors."
Cristo?" asked the traveller, to whose orders the yacht was "Yes, I paid them nothing, and yet they are gone."
for the time submitted, in a melancholy voice.
"Never mind that, Maximilian," said Monte Cristo, smiling.
"Yes, your excellency," said the captain, "we have reached it." "I have made an agreement with the navy, that the access to
"We have reached it!" repeated the traveller in an accent of my island shall be free of all charge. I have made a bargain."
indescribable sadness. Then he added, in a low tone, "Yes; Morrel looked at the count with surprise. "Count," he said,
that is the haven." And then he again plunged into a train of "you are not the same here as in Paris."
thought, the character of which was better revealed by a sad "How so?"
smile, than it would have been by tears. A few minutes
afterwards a flash of light, which was extinguished instantly, "Here you laugh." The count's brow became clouded. "You
was seen on the land, and the sound of firearms reached the are right to recall me to myself, Maximilian," he said; "I was
delighted to see you again, and forgot for the moment that
yacht.
all happiness is fleeting."
"Your excellency," said the captain, "that was the land signal,
"Oh, no, no, count," cried Maximilian, seizing the count's
will you answer yourself?"
hands, "pray laugh; be happy, and prove to me, by your
"What signal?" The captain pointed towards the island, up indifference, that life is endurable to sufferers. Oh, how
the side of which ascended a volume of smoke, increasing as charitable, kind, and good you are; you affect this gayety to
it rose. "Ah, yes," he said, as if awaking from a dream. "Give inspire me with courage."
it to me."
"You are wrong, Morrel; I was really happy."
The captain gave him a loaded carbine; the traveller slowly
raised it, and fired in the air. Ten minutes afterwards, the "Then you forget me, so much the better."
sails were furled, and they cast anchor about a hundred "How so?"
fathoms from the little harbor. The gig was already lowered,
"Yes; for as the gladiator said to the emperor, when he
and in it were four oarsmen and a coxswain. The traveller
entered the arena, `He who is about to die salutes you.'"
descended, and instead of sitting down at the stern of the
boat, which had been decorated with a blue carpet for his "Then you are not consoled?" asked the count, surprised.
accommodation, stood up with his arms crossed. The rowers "Oh," exclaimed Morrel, with a glance full of bitter reproach,
waited, their oars half lifted out of the water, like birds "do you think it possible that I could be?"
drying their wings.
"Listen," said the count. "Do you understand the meaning of
"Give way," said the traveller. The eight oars fell into the sea my words? You cannot take me for a commonplace man, a
simultaneously without splashing a drop of water, and the mere rattle, emitting a vague and senseless noise. When I ask
boat, yielding to the impulsion, glided forward. In an instant you if you are consoled, I speak to you as a man for whom
they found themselves in a little harbor, formed in a natural the human heart has no secrets. Well, Morrel, let us both
creek; the boat grounded on the fine sand.
examine the depths of your heart. Do you still feel the same
"Will your excellency be so good as to mount the feverish impatience of grief which made you start like a
456

wounded lion? Have you still that devouring thirst which
can only be appeased in the grave? Are you still actuated by
the regret which drags the living to the pursuit of death; or
are you only suffering from the prostration of fatigue and
the weariness of hope deferred? Has the loss of memory
rendered it impossible for you to weep? Oh, my dear friend,
if this be the case, -- if you can no longer weep, if your frozen
heart be dead, if you put all your trust in God, then,
Maximilian, you are consoled -- do not complain."

with that smile which made him so handsome; "I have
descended from a planet called grief."

"My friend," said the count, "I have still one doubt, -- are you
weak enough to pride yourself upon your sufferings?"

from the body. Some day, when the world is much older,
and when mankind will be masters of all the destructive
powers in nature, to serve for the general good of humanity;
when mankind, as you were just saying, have discovered the
secrets of death, then that death will become as sweet and
voluptuous as a slumber in the arms of your beloved."

"I believe all you tell me without questioning its meaning;
for instance, you told me to live, and I did live; you told me
to hope, and I almost did so. I am almost inclined to ask you,
as though you had experienced death, `is it painful to die?'"

Monte Cristo looked upon Morrel with indescribable
tenderness. "Yes," he said, "yes, doubtless it is painful, if you
violently break the outer covering which obstinately begs for
"Count," said Morrel, in a firm and at the same time soft
life. If you plunge a dagger into your flesh, if you insinuate a
voice, "listen to me, as to a man whose thoughts are raised to
bullet into your brain, which the least shock disorders, -heaven, though he remains on earth; I come to die in the
then certainly, you will suffer pain, and you will repent
arms of a friend. Certainly, there are people whom I love. I
quitting a life for a repose you have bought at so dear a
love my sister Julie, -- I love her husband Emmanuel; but I
price."
require a strong mind to smile on my last moments. My
sister would be bathed in tears and fainting; I could not bear "Yes; I know that there is a secret of luxury and pain in death,
to see her suffer. Emmanuel would tear the weapon from my as well as in life; the only thing is to understand it."
hand, and alarm the house with his cries. You, count, who "You have spoken truly, Maximilian; according to the care
are more than mortal, will, I am sure, lead me to death by a we bestow upon it, death is either a friend who rocks us
pleasant path, will you not?"
gently as a nurse, or an enemy who violently drags the soul

"No, indeed, -- I am calm," said Morrel, giving his hand to
the count; "my pulse does not beat slower or faster than
usual. No, I feel that I have reached the goal, and I will go no
farther. You told me to wait and hope; do you know what
you did, unfortunate adviser? I waited a month, or rather I
suffered for a month! I did hope (man is a poor wretched
creature), I did hope. What I cannot tell, -- something
wonderful, an absurdity, a miracle, -- of what nature he
alone can tell who has mingled with our reason that folly we
call hope. Yes, I did wait -- yes, I did hope, count, and during
this quarter of an hour we have been talking together, you
have unconsciously wounded, tortured my heart, for every
word you have uttered proved that there was no hope for
me. Oh, count, I shall sleep calmly, deliciously in the arms of
death." Morrel uttered these words with an energy which
made the count shudder. "My friend," continued Morrel,
"you named the fifth of October as the end of the period of
waiting, -- to-day is the fifth of October," he took out his
watch, "it is now nine o'clock, -- I have yet three hours to
live."
"Be it so," said the count, "come." Morrel mechanically
followed the count, and they had entered the grotto before
he perceived it. He felt a carpet under his feet, a door opened,
perfumes surrounded him, and a brilliant light dazzled his
eyes. Morrel hesitated to advance; he dreaded the enervating
effect of all that he saw. Monte Cristo drew him in gently.
"Why should we not spend the last three hours remaining to
us of life, like those ancient Romans, who when condemned
by Nero, their emperor and heir, sat down at a table covered
with flowers, and gently glided into death, amid the
perfume of heliotropes and roses?" Morrel smiled. "As you
please," he said; "death is always death, -- that is
forgetfulness, repose, exclusion from life, and therefore from
grief." He sat down, and Monte Cristo placed himself
opposite to him. They were in the marvellous dining-room
before described, where the statues had baskets on their
heads always filled with fruits and flowers. Morrel had
looked carelessly around, and had probably noticed nothing.

"And if you wished to die, you would choose this death,
count?"
"Yes."
Morrel extended his hand. "Now I understand," he said,
"why you had me brought here to this desolate spot, in the
midst of the ocean, to this subterranean palace; it was
because you loved me, was it not, count? It was because you
loved me well enough to give me one of those sweet means
of death of which we were speaking; a death without agony,
a death which allows me to fade away while pronouncing
Valentine's name and pressing your hand."
"Yes, you have guessed rightly, Morrel," said the count, "that
is what I intended."
"Thanks; the idea that tomorrow I shall no longer suffer, is
sweet to my heart."
"Do you then regret nothing?"
"No," replied Morrel.
"Not even me?" asked the count with deep emotion. Morrel's
clear eye was for the moment clouded, then it shone with
unusual lustre, and a large tear rolled down his cheek.
"What," said the count, "do you still regret anything in the
world, and yet die?"

"Oh, I entreat you," exclaimed Morrel in a low voice, "do not
speak another word, count; do not prolong my punishment."
The count fancied that he was yielding, and this belief
revived the horrible doubt that had overwhelmed him at the
Chateau d'If. "I am endeavoring," he thought, "to make this
man happy; I look upon this restitution as a weight thrown
into the scale to balance the evil I have wrought. Now,
supposing I am deceived, supposing this man has not been
unhappy enough to merit happiness. Alas, what would
become of me who can only atone for evil by doing good?"
"Let us talk like men," he said, looking at the count.
Then he said aloud: "Listen, Morrel, I see your grief is great,
"Go on!"
but still you do not like to risk your soul." Morrel smiled
"Count," said Morrel, "you are the epitome of all human sadly. "Count," he said, "I swear to you my soul is no longer
knowledge, and you seem like a being descended from a my own."
wiser and more advanced world than ours."
"Maximilian, you know I have no relation in the world. I
"There is something true in what you say," said the count,

have accustomed myself to regard you as my son: well, then,
457


CHAPTER 117 THE FIFTH OF OCTOBER

to save my son, I will sacrifice my life, nay, even my
fortune."

last effort to extend his hand, but it fell powerless beside him.
Then it appeared to him that Monte Cristo smiled, not with
the strange and fearful expression which had sometimes
"What do you mean?"
revealed to him the secrets of his heart, but with the
"I mean, that you wish to quit life because you do not benevolent kindness of a father for a child. At the same time
understand all the enjoyments which are the fruits of a large the count appeared to increase in stature, his form, nearly
fortune. Morrel, I possess nearly a hundred millions and I double its usual height, stood out in relief against the red
give them to you; with such a fortune you can attain every tapestry, his black hair was thrown back, and he stood in the
wish. Are you ambitions? Every career is open to you. attitude of an avenging angel. Morrel, overpowered, turned
Overturn the world, change its character, yield to mad ideas, around in the arm-chair; a delicious torpor permeated every
be even criminal -- but live."
vein. A change of ideas presented themselves to his brain,
"Count, I have your word," said Morrel coldly; then taking like a new design on the kaleidoscope. Enervated, prostrate,
and breathless, he became unconscious of outward objects;
out his watch, he added, "It is half-past eleven."
he seemed to be entering that vague delirium preceding
"Morrel, can you intend it in my house, under my very death. He wished once again to press the count's hand, but
eyes?"
his own was immovable. He wished to articulate a last
"Then let me go," said Maximilian, "or I shall think you did farewell, but his tongue lay motionless and heavy in his
throat, like a stone at the mouth of a sepulchre. Involuntarily
not love me for my own sake, but for yours; "and he arose.
his languid eyes closed, and still through his eyelashes a
"It is well," said Monte Cristo whose countenance brightened
well-known form seemed to move amid the obscurity with
at these words; "you wish -- you are inflexible. Yes, as you
which he thought himself enveloped.
said, you are indeed wretched and a miracle alone can cure
you. Sit down, Morrel, and wait."
Morrel obeyed; the count arose, and unlocking a closet with
a key suspended from his gold chain, took from it a little
silver casket, beautifully carved and chased, the corners of
which represented four bending figures, similar to the
Caryatides, the forms of women, symbols of the angels
aspiring to heaven. He placed the casket on the table; then
opening it took out a little golden box, the top of which flew
open when touched by a secret spring. This box contained an
unctuous substance partly solid, of which it was impossible
to discover the color, owing to the reflection of the polished
gold, sapphires, rubies, emeralds, which ornamented the box.
It was a mixed mass of blue, red, and gold. The count took
out a small quantity of this with a gilt spoon, and offered it
to Morrel, fixing a long steadfast glance upon him. It was
then observable that the substance was greenish.

The count had just opened a door. Immediately a brilliant
light from the next room, or rather from the palace adjoining,
shone upon the room in which he was gently gliding into his
last sleep. Then he saw a woman of marvellous beauty
appear on the threshold of the door separating the two
rooms. Pale, and sweetly smiling, she looked like an angel of
mercy conjuring the angel of vengeance. "Is it heaven that
opens before me?" thought the dying man; "that angel
resembles the one I have lost." Monte Cristo pointed out
Morrel to the young woman, who advanced towards him
with clasped hands and a smile upon her lips.
"Valentine, Valentine!" he mentally ejaculated; but his lips
uttered no sound, and as though all his strength were
centred in that internal emotion, he sighed and closed his
eyes. Valentine rushed towards him; his lips again moved.

"This is what you asked for," he said, "and what I promised "He is calling you," said the count; "he to whom you have
to give you."
confided your destiny -- he from whom death would have
"I thank you from the depths of my heart," said the young separated you, calls you to him. Happily, I vanquished death.
man, taking the spoon from the hands of Monte Cristo. The Henceforth, Valentine, you will never again be separated on
count took another spoon, and again dipped it into the earth, since he has rushed into death to find you. Without
golden box. "What are you going to do, my friend?" asked me, you would both have died. May God accept my
atonement in the preservation of these two existences!"
Morrel, arresting his hand.
"Well, the fact is, Morrel, I was thinking that I too am weary
of life, and since an opportunity presents itself" -"Stay!" said the young man. "You who love, and are beloved;
you, who have faith and hope, -- oh, do not follow my
example. In your case it would be a crime. Adieu, my noble
and generous friend, adieu; I will go and tell Valentine what
you have done for me." And slowly, though without any
hesitation, only waiting to press the count's hand fervently,
he swallowed the mysterious substance offered by Monte
Cristo. Then they were both silent. Ali, mute and attentive,
brought the pipes and coffee, and disappeared. By degrees,
the light of the lamps gradually faded in the hands of the
marble statues which held them, and the perfumes appeared
less powerful to Morrel. Seated opposite to him, Monte
Cristo watched him in the shadow, and Morrel saw nothing
but the bright eyes of the count. An overpowering sadness
took possession of the young man, his hands relaxed their
hold, the objects in the room gradually lost their form and
color, and his disturbed vision seemed to perceive doors and
curtains open in the walls.
"Friend," he cried, "I feel that I am dying; thanks!" He made a
458

Valentine seized the count's hand, and in her irresistible
impulse of joy carried it to her lips.
"Oh, thank me again!" said the count; "tell me till you are
weary, that I have restored you to happiness; you do not
know how much I require this assurance."
"Oh, yes, yes, I thank you with all my heart," said Valentine;
"and if you doubt the sincerity of my gratitude, oh, then, ask
Haidee! ask my beloved sister Haidee, who ever since our
departure from France, has caused me to wait patiently for
this happy day, while talking to me of you."
"You then love Haidee?" asked Monte Cristo with an
emotion he in vain endeavored to dissimulate.
"Oh, yes, with all my soul."
"Well, then, listen, Valentine," said the count; "I have a favor
to ask of you."
"Of me? Oh, am I happy enough for that?"
"Yes; you have called Haidee your sister, -- let her become so
indeed, Valentine; render her all the gratitude you fancy that
you owe to me; protect her, for" (the count's voice was thick
with emotion) "henceforth she will be alone in the world."

"Alone in the world!" repeated a voice behind the count,
"and why?"

opened, but they were at first fixed and expressionless; then
sight returned, and with it feeling and grief. "Oh," he cried,
in an accent of despair, "the count has deceived me; I am yet
Monte Cristo turned around; Haidee was standing pale,
living; "and extending his hand towards the table, he seized
motionless, looking at the count with an expression of fearful
a knife.
amazement.
"Dearest," exclaimed Valentine, with her adorable smile,
"Because to-morrow, Haidee, you will be free; you will then
"awake, and look at me!" Morrel uttered a loud exclamation,
assume your proper position in society, for I will not allow
and frantic, doubtful, dazzled, as though by a celestial vision,
my destiny to overshadow yours. Daughter of a prince, I
he fell upon his knees.
restore to you the riches and name of your father."
The next morning at daybreak, Valentine and Morrel were
Haidee became pale, and lifting her transparent hands to
walking arm-in-arm on the sea-shore, Valentine relating how
heaven, exclaimed in a voice stifled with tears, "Then you
Monte Cristo had appeared in her room, explained
leave me, my lord?"
everything, revealed the crime, and, finally, how he had
"Haidee, Haidee, you are young and beautiful; forget even saved her life by enabling her to simulate death. They had
my name, and be happy."
found the door of the grotto opened, and gone forth; on the
"It is well," said Haidee; "your order shall be executed, my azure dome of heaven still glittered a few remaining stars.
lord; I will forget even your name, and be happy." And she Morrel soon perceived a man standing among the rocks,
apparently awaiting a sign from them to advance, and
stepped back to retire.
pointed him out to Valentine. "Ah, it is Jacopo," she said, "the
"Oh, heavens," exclaimed Valentine, who was supporting the captain of the yacht; "and she beckoned him towards them.
head of Morrel on her shoulder, "do you not see how pale
"Do you wish to speak to us?" asked Morrel.
she is? Do you not see how she suffers?"
Haidee answered with a heartrending expression, "Why "I have a letter to give you from the count."
should he understand this, my sister? He is my master, and I "From the count!" murmured the two young people.
am his slave; he has the right to notice nothing."
"Yes; read it." Morrel opened the letter, and read: -The count shuddered at the tones of a voice which
"My Dear Maximilian, -penetrated the inmost recesses of his heart; his eyes met
those of the young girl and he could not bear their brilliancy. "There is a felucca for you at anchor. Jacopo will carry you to
"Oh, heavens," exclaimed Monte Cristo, "can my suspicions Leghorn, where Monsieur Noirtier awaits his granddaughter,
be correct? Haidee, would it please you not to leave me?"
whom he wishes to bless before you lead her to the altar. All
that is in this grotto, my friend, my house in the Champs
"I am young," gently replied Haidee; "I love the life you have
Elysees, and my chateau at Treport, are the marriage gifts
made so sweet to me, and I should be sorry to die."
bestowed by Edmond Dantes upon the son of his old master,
"You mean, then, that if I leave you, Haidee" -Morrel. Mademoiselle de Villefort will share them with you;
for I entreat her to give to the poor the immense fortune
"I should die; yes, my lord."
reverting to her from her father, now a madman, and her
"Do you then love me?"
brother who died last September with his mother. Tell the
"Oh, Valentine, he asks if I love him. Valentine, tell him if angel who will watch over your future destiny, Morrel, to
you love Maximilian." The count felt his heart dilate and pray sometimes for a man, who like Satan thought himself
throb; he opened his arms, and Haidee, uttering a cry, for an instant equal to God, but who now acknowledges
sprang into them. "Oh, yes," she cried, "I do love you! I love with Christian humility that God alone possesses supreme
you as one loves a father, brother, husband! I love you as my power and infinite wisdom. Perhaps those prayers may
soften the remorse he feels in his heart. As for you, Morrel,
life, for you are the best, the noblest of created beings!"
this is the secret of my conduct towards you. There is neither
"Let it be, then, as you wish, sweet angel; God has sustained
happiness nor misery in the world; there is only the
me in my struggle with my enemies, and has given me this
comparison of one state with another, nothing more. He who
reward; he will not let me end my triumph in suffering; I
has felt the deepest grief is best able to experience supreme
wished to punish myself, but he has pardoned me. Love me
happiness. We must have felt what it is to die, Morrel, that
then, Haidee! Who knows? perhaps your love will make me
we may appreciate the enjoyments of living.
forget all that I do not wish to remember."
"Live, then, and be happy, beloved children of my heart, and
"What do you mean, my lord?"
never forget that until the day when God shall deign to
"I mean that one word from you has enlightened me more reveal the future to man, all human wisdom is summed up
than twenty years of slow experience; I have but you in the in these two words, -- `Wait and hope.' Your friend,
world, Haidee; through you I again take hold on life,
"Edmond Dantes, Count of Monte Cristo."
through you I shall suffer, through you rejoice."
During the perusal of this letter, which informed Valentine
"Do you hear him, Valentine?" exclaimed Haidee; "he says
for the first time of the madness of her father and the death
that through me he will suffer -- through me, who would
of her brother, she became pale, a heavy sigh escaped from
yield my life for his." The count withdrew for a moment.
her bosom, and tears, not the less painful because they were
"Have I discovered the truth?" he said; "but whether it be for
silent, ran down her cheeks; her happiness cost her very dear.
recompense or punishment, I accept my fate. Come, Haidee,
Morrel looked around uneasily. "But," he said, "the count's
come!" and throwing his arm around the young girl's waist,
generosity is too overwhelming; Valentine will be satisfied
he pressed the hand of Valentine, and disappeared.
with my humble fortune. Where is the count, friend? Lead
An hour had nearly passed, during which Valentine, me to him." Jacopo pointed towards the horizon. "What do
breathless and motionless, watched steadfastly over Morrel. you mean?" asked Valentine. "Where is the count? -- where is
At length she felt his heart beat, a faint breath played upon Haidee?"
his lips, a slight shudder, announcing the return of life,
"Look!" said Jacopo.
passed through the young man's frame. At length his eyes
459


CHAPTER 117 THE FIFTH OF OCTOBER

The eyes of both were fixed upon the spot indicated by the "Who can say whether we shall ever see them again?" said
sailor, and on the blue line separating the sky from the Morrel with tearful eyes.
Mediterranean Sea, they perceived a large white sail. "Gone,"
"Darling," replied Valentine, "has not the count just told us
said Morrel; "gone! -- adieu, my friend -- adieu, my father!"
that all human wisdom is summed up in two words? -- `Wait
"Gone," murmured Valentine; "adieu, my sweet Haidee -- and hope.'"
adieu, my sister!"

460

